NPR 7150.2D -- TOC                                                                                               Page 1 of 89



                        | NODIS Library | Program Formulation(7000s) | Search |
                 NASA                                                                                      NPR 7150.2D
                 Procedural                                                                     Effective Date: March 08, 2022
                                                                                               Expiration Date: March 08, 2027
                 Requirements
                     COMPLIANCE IS MANDATORY FOR NASA EMPLOYEES


NASA Software Engineering Requirements
Responsible Office: Office of the Chief Engineer


Table of Contents
Preface
P.1 Purpose
P.2 Applicability
P.3 Authority
P.4 Applicable Documents and Forms
P.5 Measurement/Verification
P.6 Cancellation

Chapter 1. Introduction
1.1 Overview
1.2 Hierarchy of NASA Software-Related Engineering and Program/Project Documents
1.3 Document Structure

Chapter 2. Roles, Responsibilities, and Principles Related to
Tailoring of the Requirements
2.1 Roles and Responsibilities
2.2 Principles Related to Tailoring of the Requirements

Chapter 3. Software Management Requirements
3.1 Software Life Cycle Planning
3.2 Software Cost Estimation
3.3 Software Schedules
3.4 Software Training
                          This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- TOC     incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check           Page 1 of 89
                       the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                              this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- TOC                                                                                     Page 2 of 89


3.4 Software Training
3.5 Software Classification Assessments
3.6 Software Assurance and Software Independent Verification & Validation
3.7 Safety-Critical Software
3.8 Automatic Generation of Software Source Code
3.9 Software Development Processes and Practices
3.10 Software Reuse
3.11 Software Cybersecurity
3.12 Software Bi-Directional Traceability

Chapter 4. Software Engineering (Life Cycle) Requirements
4.1 Software Requirements
4.2 Software Architecture
4.3 Software Design
4.4 Software Implementation
4.5 Software Testing
4.6 Software Operations, Maintenance, and Retirement

Chapter 5. Supporting Software Life Cycle Requirements
5.1 Software Configuration Management
5.2 Software Risk Management
5.3 Software Peer Reviews/Inspections
5.4 Software Measurements
5.5 Software Non-conformance or Defect Management

Chapter 6. Recommended Software Documentation Contents
6.1 Software Engineering Products
6.2 Software Engineering Product Content

Appendix A. Definitions
Appendix B. Acronyms
Appendix C. Requirements Mapping Matrix
Appendix D. Software Classifications
Appendix E. References
List of Figures
Figure 1. NASA Software Classification Structure

List of Tables

                        This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- TOC   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 2 of 89
                     the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                            this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- TOC                                                                                     Page 3 of 89




Table 1. Bi-directional traceability by software classification
Table 2. Requirements Mapping Matrix




                        This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- TOC   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 3 of 89
                     the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                            this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface                                                                                     Page 4 of 89




Preface
P.1 Purpose
Software engineering is a core capability and key enabling technology for NASA''s missions and
supporting infrastructure. This NASA Procedural Requirement (NPR) establishes the engineering
requirements for software acquisition, development, maintenance, retirement, operations, and
management consistent with the governance model contained in NASA Policy Directive (NPD)
1000.0, NASA Governance and Strategic Management Handbook. This NASA Procedural
Requirements (NPR) supports the implementation of NPD 7120.4, NASA Engineering and
Program/Project Management Policy.

P.2 Applicability
a. This NPR applies to NASA Headquarters (HQ) and NASA Centers, including Component
Facilities and Technical and Service Support Centers. This language applies to the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (JPL) (a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)), other
contractors, grant recipients, or parties to cooperative agreements and other agreements only to the
extent specified or referenced in the appropriate contracts, grants, or agreements.
Note: The above statement alone is not sufficient to stipulate requirements for the contractor, grant
recipient, or agreement. This NPR provides requirements for NASA contracts, grant recipients, or
agreements to the responsible NASA project managers, contracting officers, and the contracting
officers representatives that are made mandatory through contract clauses, specifications, or
statements of work (SOWs) in conformance with the NASA Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)
Supplement or by stipulating in the contracts, grants, or agreements which of the NPR requirements
apply.
b. This NPR applies to the complete software development life cycle, including software planning,
development, testing, maintenance, retirement, operations, management, acquisition, and assurance
activities. The requirements of this directive cover such software created, acquired, or maintained by
NASA or for NASA to the extent specified or referenced in an appropriate contract, grant, or
cooperative agreement. The applicability of these requirements to specific systems and subsystems
within the Agency's investment areas, programs, and projects is through the use of the NASA-wide
definition of software classes, defined in Appendix D. Some projects may contain multiple software
systems and software subsystems having different software classes. For this directive, software is
defined in Appendix A, and includes software executing on processors embedded in programmable
logic devices.




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 4 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface                                                                                     Page 5 of 89




                             Figure 1. NASA software classification structure.
c. For existing Class A through E programs and projects, the software engineering requirements of
this NPR apply to their current and future phases as determined by the responsible Mission
Directorate as approved by the NASA Chief Engineer (or as delegated).
d. For existing Class F programs and projects, the software engineering requirements of this NPR
apply to their current and future phases as determined by the Center Chief Information Officer (CIO)
and approved by the NASA CIO (or delegate).
e. This NPR can be applied to other NASA investments at the discretion of the responsible manager
or the NASA Associate Administrator. This NPR is not retroactively applicable to software
development, maintenance, operations, management, acquisition, and assurance activities started
before the effective date of this NPR (i.e., existing systems and subsystems containing software for
the International Space Station, Hubble, Chandra, etc.).
f. This NPR does not supersede more stringent requirements imposed by individual NASA
organizations and other Federal Government agencies or by Federal law.
g. In this NPR, all mandatory actions (i.e., requirements) are denoted by statements containing the
term "shall," followed by a software engineering (SWE) requirement number. The terms "may" or
"can" denote discretionary privilege or permission, "should" denotes a good practice and is
recommended but not required, "will" denotes expected outcome, and "are/is" denotes descriptive
material.
h. In this NPR, all document citations are assumed to be the latest version unless otherwise noted.


                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 5 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface                                                                                     Page 6 of 89


P.3 Authority
a. The National Aeronautics and Space Act, as amended, 51 U.S.C. § 20113(a).
b. NPD 1000.0, NASA Governance and Strategic Management Handbook.
c. NPD 1000.3, The NASA Organization.
d. NPD 1000.5, Policy for NASA Acquisition.
e. NPD 7120.4, NASA Engineering and Program/Project Management Policy.

P.4 Applicable Documents and Forms
a. NPD 1210.2, NASA Surveys, Audits, and Reviews Policy.
b. NPD 1600.2, NASA Security Policy.
c. NPD 2091.1, Inventions Made By Government Employees.
d. NPD 2800.1, Managing Information Technology.
e. NPR 1600.1, NASA Security Program Procedural Requirements.
f. NPR 2800.2, Information and Communication Technology Accessibility.
g. NPR 2810.1, Security of Information Technology.
h. NPR 7120.5, NASA Space Flight Program and Project Management Requirements.
i. NPR 7120.7, NASA Information Technology and Institutional Infrastructure Program and Project
Management Requirements.
j. NPR 7120.8, NASA Research and Technology Program and Project Management Requirements.
k. NPR 8705.2, Human-Rating Requirements for Space Systems.
l. NPR 8705.4, Risk Classification for NASA Payloads.
m. NPR 8715.3, NASA General Safety Program Requirements.
n. NASA-STD-1006, Space System Protection Standard.
o. NASA-STD-8739.8, Software Assurance and Software Safety Standard.
p. NASA-HDBK-2203, NASA Software Engineering Handbook.

P.5 Measurement/Verification
Implementation of this directive is defined as implementing all the identified processes, activities,
and requirements in accordance with the software classification and approved software tailoring.
Compliance with this NPR is verified by submission of the completed Requirements Mapping
Matrix(ces) to responsible NASA officials, including any approved tailoring (see Appendix C) and
by internal and external controls. Internal controls processes are defined in NPD 1200.1, NASA
                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 6 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface                                                                                     Page 7 of 89


Internal Control. Internal controls include surveys, audits, and reviews conducted in accordance
with NPD 1210.2, NASA Surveys, Audits, and Reviews Policy. External controls may include
external surveys, audits, and reporting or contractual requirements.

P.6 Cancellation
a. NPR 7150.2C, NASA Software Engineering Requirements, dated August 02, 2019.
b. NASA Interim Directive 7150-113: NASA Interim Directive for Software License Management,
dated June 13, 2017.




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Preface   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 7 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter1                                                                                     Page 8 of 89




Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Overview
1.1.1 This directive imposes requirements on procedures, design considerations, activities, and tasks
used to acquire, develop, maintain, operate, retire, and manage applicable software. This directive is
a designed set of requirements for protecting the ’Agency’s investment in software engineering
products and fulfilling our responsibility to the citizens of the United States (U.S.).
1.1.2 The requirements in this directive have been extracted from industry standards and proven
NASA experience in software engineering. Centers and software developers may show that many of
the requirements are satisfied through existing programs, procedures, and processes.
1.1.3 The Agency makes significant investments in software engineering to support the Agency’s
investment areas: Space Flight, Aeronautics, Research and Technology, Information Technology
(IT), and Institutional Infrastructure. NASA ensures that programs, projects, systems, and
subsystems that use software follow a standard set of requirements. One of the goals of this directive
is to bring the Agency’s engineering and software development and management communities
together to optimize resources and talents across Center boundaries. For NASA to effectively
communicate and work seamlessly across Centers, a common framework of generic requirements is
needed. This directive fulfills this need for the Agency within the discipline of software engineering.
1.1.4 This directive does not require a specific software life cycle model. Where this NPR refers to
phases and milestone reviews in the software life cycle, it uses the standard NASA life cycle models
described in NPR 7120.5, NASA Space Flight Program and Project Management Requirements,
NPR 7120.7, NASA Information Technology Program and Project Management Requirements, and
NPR 7120.8, NASA Research and Technology Program and Project Management Requirements, as
supported by milestone reviews described in NPR 7123.1, NASA Systems Engineering Processes
and Requirements.
1.1.5 NASA is committed to instituting and updating these requirements to meet the Agency’s
current and future challenges in software engineering. Successful experiences are codified in
updated versions of this directive after experience has been gained through its use within the NASA
software community, the collection of lessons learned from projects, and the implementation
records of the Engineering Technical Authorities (ETAs).

1.2 Hierarchy of NASA Software-Related Engineering and
Program/Project Documents
1.2.1 Agency-Level Software Policies and Requirements
NPD 7120.4, NASA Engineering and Program/Project Management Policy, is an overarching
directive that establishes top-level policies for all software created, acquired, or maintained by or for
NASA, including Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) software, Government-off-the-shelf (GOTS)
software, and Modified-off-the-shelf (MOTS) software and open-source software, embedded
software, reused software, legacy software, and heritage software. This directive supports the
implementation of NPD 7120.4, and establishes the Agency set of software engineering

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter1   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 8 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter1                                                                                     Page 9 of 89


requirements for software acquisition, development, maintenance, retirement, operations, and
management. It provides a set of software engineering requirements in generic terms for use by
NASA, contractors, grant recipients, or parties to agreements. Additional Agency-level project
management requirements and systems engineering requirements exist that influence and affect the
software development activities on a project. In the event of a conflict between an NPD and NPR,
the NPD takes precedence.
1.2.2 Agency-Level Multi-Center and Product Line Requirements (non-software specific)
Existing Agency-Level NPDs and NPRs elaborate, tailor, and in some cases add requirements to
those above to address the needs of major multi-Center projects, specific product lines, and specific
focus areas. Examples of representative NPRs in this category are NPR 8705.2, Human-Rating
Requirements for Space Systems, NPR 8715.3, NASA General Safety Program Requirements, NPR
8735.2, Hardware Quality Assurance Program Requirements for Programs and Projects, NPR
7120.5, NPR7123.1, NPD 2800.1, Managing Information Technology, NPR 2800.2, Information
and Communication Technology Accessibility, and NPR 2810.1, Security of Information
Technology.
1.2.3 Center-Level Directives or Requirements (related to software)
Center-level directives or requirements are developed by NASA Centers to document their local
software policies, requirements, and procedures. These directives are responsive to the higher-level
requirements while addressing the specific application areas and the Center’s mission within the
Agency. In the event of a conflict between this NPR with a Center-level directive, the information
provided in this NPR takes precedence.

1.3 Document Structure
1.3.1 Chapter 2 describes the roles, responsibilities, and institutional requirements relevant to the
requirements in this directive. This chapter describes the responsibilities for maintaining and
advancing organizational capability in software engineering practices to effectively meet the
scientific and technological objectives of the Agency. It defines the roles and responsibilities of key
officials in software engineering management, the software development and management
processes, and the software life cycle management processes. Specific software classification
applicability, if any, for the requirements in Chapter 2 are contained in the requirement wording. The
requirements in Chapter 2 are not part of the Requirements Mapping Matrix in Appendix C.
Approval of any tailoring of requirements designated in Chapter 2 can be done by the appropriate
organization per the defined roles and responsibilities.
1.3.2 Chapter 3 establishes software management requirements. The software management activities
define and control the many software aspects of a project from beginning to end. The software
management activities include the required interfaces to other organizations, determination of
deliverables, cost estimates, tracking of schedules, risk management, formal and informal reviews,
as well as other forms of verification and validation, and determination of the amount of supporting
services. The planned management of these activities is captured in one or more software or system
plans.
1.3.3 Chapter 4 provides the software engineering life cycle requirements. This directive makes no
recommendation for a specific software life cycle model. Each has its strengths and weaknesses, and
no one model is best for every situation. Whether using the agile methods, spiral model, the iterative

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter1   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 9 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter1                                                                                     Page 10 of 89


model, waterfall, or any other development life cycle model, each has its own set of requirements,
design, implementation, testing, release to operations, maintenance, and retirement. Although this
directive does not impose a particular life cycle model on each software project, it does support a
standard set of life cycle phases. Use of the different phases of a life cycle allows the various
products of a project to be gradually developed and matured from initial concepts through the
fielding of the product and to its final retirement.
1.3.4 Chapter 5 provides supporting software life cycle requirements. Unlike development
processes, support processes are not targeted primarily at a specific phase of the project life cycle
but typically occur with similar intensity throughout the complete project or product life cycle. For
example, normal configuration management baselines (e.g., requirements, code, and products)
happen across the life cycle, as does cybersecurity. Support processes are software management and
engineering processes that support the entire software life cycle: Software Configuration
Management, Risk Management, Peer Reviews, Inspections, Software Measurement, and
Non-conformance and Defect Management.
1.3.5 Chapter 6 provides a list of the recommended software records.
1.3.6 Appendix A provides definitions.
1.3.7 Appendix B provides acronyms used in this directive.
1.3.8 Appendix C contains the Requirements Mapping Matrix.
1.3.9 Appendix D contains software classifications.
1.3.10 Appendix E contains software references for this directive.




                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter1   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 10 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 11 of 89




Chapter 2. Roles, Responsibilities, and
Principles Related to Tailoring of the
Requirements
2.1 Roles and Responsibilities Associated with this Directive
2.1.1 The NASA Office of the Chief Engineer (OCE).
2.1.1.1 The NASA OCE shall lead and maintain a NASA Software Engineering Initiative to advance
software engineering practices. [SWE-002]
2.1.1.2 The NASA OCE shall periodically benchmark each Center’s software engineering capability
against requirements in this directive. [SWE-004]

     Note: Capability Maturity Model® Integration (CMMI®) for Development (CMMI®-DEV)
     appraisals are the preferred benchmarks for objectively measuring progress toward
     software engineering process improvement at NASA Centers.

2.1.1.3 The NASA OCE shall periodically review the project requirements mapping matrices.
[SWE-152]
2.1.1.4 The NASA OCE shall authorize appraisals against selected requirements in this NPR to
check compliance. [SWE-129]
2.1.1.5 The NASA OCE and Center training organizations shall provide training to advance
software engineering practices. [SWE-100]
2.1.1.6 The NASA OCE shall maintain an Agency-wide process asset library of applicable best
practices and process templates for all size projects. [SWE-098]
2.1.2 NASA Chief, Safety and Mission Assurance (SMA).
2.1.2.1 The NASA Chief, SMA manages Agency software assurance policy and software safety
policies and is the Technical Authority (TA) for any requirements in this directive.
2.1.2.2 The NASA Chief, SMA shall lead and maintain a NASA Software Assurance and Software
Safety Initiative to advance software assurance and software safety practices. [SWE-208]
2.1.2.3 The NASA Chief, SMA shall periodically benchmark each Center’s software assurance and
software safety capabilities against the NASA-STD-8739.8, NASA Software Assurance and
Software Safety Standard. [SWE-209]
2.1.2.4 The NASA Chief, SMA shall periodically review the project’s requirements mapping
matrices. [SWE-212]
2.1.2.5 The NASA Chief, SMA shall authorize appraisals against selected requirements in this NPR
to check compliance. [SWE-221]

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 11 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 12 of 89



2.1.2.6 The NASA Chief, SMA shall provide for software assurance training. [SWE-222]
2.1.2.7 The NASA Chief, SMA shall make the final decision on all proposed tailoring of SWE-141,
the Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V) requirement. [SWE-223]
2.1.3 NASA Chief, Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
2.1.3.1 The NASA OCIO Senior Agency Information Security Officer (SAISO) will conduct
security assessments and appraisals on selected requirements in this NPR to check compliance.
2.1.3.2 The NASA OCIO SAISO will participate in any software development reviews, as needed.
2.1.4 Chief Health and Medical Officer (CHMO)
2.1.4.1 The CHMO is the TA for any requirements which impact health and medical aspects.
2.1.4.2 The CHMO has approval authority of tailoring of software with health and medical
implications as documented in NPR 7120.11, Health and Medical Technical Authority
Implementation.
2.1.5 Center Director
2.1.5.1 In this directive, the phrase “the Center Directors shall...” means that the roles and
responsibilities of the Center Directors may be further delegated within the organization consistent
with the scope and scale of the system.
2.1.5.2 Center Director, or designee, shall maintain, staff, and implement a plan to continually
advance the Center’s in-house software engineering capability and monitor the software engineering
capability of NASA’s contractors. [SWE-003]

     Note: The recommended practices and guidelines for the content of a Center Software
     Engineering Improvement Plan are defined in NASA-HDBK-2203, NASA Software
     Engineering Handbook. Each Center has a current Center Software Engineering
     Improvement Plan on file in the NASA Chief Engineer’s office.

2.1.5.3 Center Director, or designee, shall establish, document, execute, and maintain software
processes per the requirements in this directive. [SWE-005]
2.1.5.4 Center Director, or designee, shall comply with the requirements in this directive that are
marked with an “X” in Appendix C. [SWE-140]

     Note: The responsibilities for approving changes in the requirements for a project is listed
     for each requirement in the requirement mapping matrix. When the requirement and
     software class are marked with an “X,” the projects will record the risk and rationale for
     any requirement that is not completely implemented by the project. The projects can
     document their related mitigations and risk acceptance in the approved Requirements
     Mapping Matrix. Project relief from the applicable cybersecurity requirements, Section
     3.11, Software Cybersecurity, has to include an agreement from the SAISO or Center CISO,
     as designated by the SAISO. The NASA Agency CIO, or Center CIO designee, has
     institutional authority on all Class F software projects.

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 12 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 13 of 89




2.1.5.5 The Center Director, or designee, shall report on the status of the Center’s software
engineering discipline, as applied to its projects, upon request by the OCE, OSMA, or OCHMO.
[SWE-095]
2.1.5.6 Center Director, or designee, shall maintain a reliable list of their Center’s programs and
projects containing Class A, B, C, and D software. The list should include: [SWE-006]
a. Project/program name and Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) number.
b. Software name(s) and WBS number(s).
c. Software size estimate (report in Kilo/Thousand Source Lines of Code (KSLOCs)).
d. The phase of development or operations.
e. Software Class or list of the software classes being used on the project.
f. Software safety-critical status.
g. For each Computer Software Configuration Item (CSCI)/Major System containing Class A, B, or
C software, provide:
(1) The name of the software development organization.
(2) Title or brief description of the CSCI/Major System.
(3) The estimated total KSLOCs, the CSCI/Major System, represents.
(4) The primary programming languages used.
(5) The life cycle methodology on the software project.
(6) Name of responsible software assurance organization(s).
2.1.5.7 For Class A, B, and C software projects, the Center Director, or designee, shall establish and
maintain a software measurement repository for software project measurements containing at a
minimum: [SWE-091]
a. Software development tracking data.
b. Software functionality achieved data.
c. Software quality data.
d. Software development effort and cost data.
2.1.5.8 For Class A, B, and C software projects, the Center Director, or designee, shall utilize
software measurement data for monitoring software engineering capability, improving software
quality, and to track the status of software engineering improvement activities. [SWE-092]
2.1.5.9 Center Director, or designee, will maintain and implement software training to advance its
in-house software engineering capabilities.
2.1.5.10 For Class A, B, and C software projects, each Center Director, or designee, shall establish
and maintain software cost repository(ies) that contains at least the following measures: [SWE-142]

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 13 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 14 of 89



a. Planned and actual effort and cost.
b. Planned and actual schedule dates for major milestones.
c. Both planned and actual values for key cost parameters that typically include software size,
requirements count, defects counts for maintenance or sustaining engineering projects, and cost
model inputs.
d. Project descriptors or metadata that typically includes software class, software domain/type, and
requirements volatility.
2.1.5.11 Each Center Director, or designee, shall contribute applicable software engineering process
assets in use at his/her Centers to the Agency-wide process asset library. [SWE-144]
2.1.5.12 The designated ETA(s) shall define the content requirements for software documents or
records. [SWE-153].

     Note: The recommended practices and guidelines for the content of different types of
     software activities (whether stand-alone or condensed into one or more project level or
     software documents or electronic files) are defined in NASA-HDBK-2203. The Center
     defined content should address prescribed content, format, maintenance instructions, and
     submittal requirements for all software related records. The designated TA for software
     approves the required software content for projects within their scope of authority.
     Electronic submission of data deliverables is preferred. “Software records should be in
     accordance with NPR 7120.5, NPD 2810.1, NASA Information Security Policy, NPD
     2800.1, and NPR 2810.1.”

2.1.5.13 The Center Director, or designee, shall ensure that the Government has clear rights in the
software, a Government purpose license, or other appropriate license or permission from third party
owners prior to providing the software for internal NASA software sharing or reuse. [SWE-215]
2.1.5.14 The Center Director, or designee, shall ensure that all software listed on the internal
software sharing or reuse catalog(s) conforms to NASA software engineering policy and
requirements. [SWE-216]
2.1.5.15 The Center Director, or designee, (e.g., the Civil Servant Technical Point of Contact (POC)
for the software product) shall perform the following actions: [SWE-217]
a. Keep a list of all contributors to the software product.
b. Ensure that the software product contains appropriate disclaimer and indemnification provisions
(e.g., in a “README” file) stating that the software may be subject to U.S. export control
restrictions, and it is provided “as is” without any warranty, express or implied, and that the recipient
waives any claims against, and indemnifies and holds harmless, NASA and its contractors and
subcontractors.
2.1.5.16 The Center Director or designee (e.g., the Civil Servant Technical POC for the software
product) shall perform the following actions for each type of internal NASA software transfer or
reuse: [SWE-214]
a. A NASA civil servant to a NASA civil servant:
                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 14 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 15 of 89


a. A NASA civil servant to a NASA civil servant:
(1) Verify the requesting NASA civil servant has requested and completed an Acknowledgment (as
set forth in the note following paragraph 3.10.2e).
(2) Provide the software to the requesting NASA civil servant.
b. A NASA civil servant to a NASA contractor:
(1) Verify a NASA civil servant (e.g., a Contracting Officer (CO) or Contracting Officer
Representative (COR)) has confirmed the NASA contractor requires such software for the
performance of Government work under their NASA contract and that such performance of work
will be a Government purpose. Center Intellectual Property Counsel should be consulted for any
questions regarding what is or is not a Government purpose.
(2) Verify a NASA civil servant (e.g., a CO or COR) has confirmed an appropriate Government
Furnished Software clause (e.g., 1852.227-88, “Government-furnished computer software and
related technical data”) is in the subject contract (or, if not, that such clause is first added); or the
contractor may also obtain access to the software in accordance with the external release
requirements of NPR 2210.1, Release of NASA Software.
(3) Verify NASA contractor is not a foreign person (as defined by 22 CFR §120.16).
(4) Verify there is a requesting NASA Civil servant (e.g., a CO or COR), and the requesting NASA
civil servant has executed an Acknowledgment (as set forth in the note following paragraph
3.10.2e).
(5) After items (1), (2), (3), and (4) are complete, provide the software to the requesting NASA civil
servant. The requesting NASA civil servant is responsible for furnishing the software to the
contractor pursuant to the subject contract’s terms.
c. A NASA civil servant to any NASA grantees, Cooperative Agreement Recipients or any other
agreement partners or to any other entity under U.S. Government Agency Release, Open source
Release, Public Release, U.S. Release, Foreign Release:
(1) If the release is to any NASA grantees, Cooperative Agreement Recipients, or any other
agreement (e.g., Space Act Agreement) partners or to any other entity under U.S. Government
Agency Release, an Open source Release, a Public Release, a U.S. Release, or a Foreign Release,
the software release is completed in accordance with the external release requirements of NPR
2210.1, Release of NASA Software – Revalidated w/change 1.
2.1.6 Center SMA Director
2.1.6.1 In this document, the phrase “the Center SMA Director will…” means that the roles and
responsibilities of the Center SMA Directors may be further delegated within the organization
consistent with the scope and scale of the system. The Center SMA Director designates SMA TAs
for programs, facilities, and projects, providing direction, functional oversight, and assessment for
all Agency safety, reliability, maintainability, and quality engineering and assurance activities,
including Software Assurance.
2.1.6.2 The Center SMA Director will assure the project completes thorough hazard analyses which
include software.


                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 15 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 16 of 89




     Note: The project manager is responsible for assuring Software Safety Hazard Analyses is
     performed on their project. The PM is responsible for the development of the project’s
     software hazard analyses and its independent review. Any differences in software safety’s
     independent software safety critical determinations will be worked through the ETA and
     the SMA TA.

2.1.6.3 The Center SMA Director, will review the project’s IV&V ’Project Execution Plan (IPEP) to
ensure it meets NASA IV&V criteria as defined in NASA-STD-8739.8.
2.1.6.4 The Center SMA Director will support the project to ensure that acquired, developed, and
maintained software, as required by SWE-032, is developed by an organization with a non-expired
CMMI®-DEV rating as measured by a CMMI® Institute Certified Lead Appraiser.
2.1.6.5 The Center SMA Director will support the Center organizations in obtaining and maintaining
the NASA organization’s CMMI®-DEV ratings.
2.1.6.6 The Center SMA Director, or designee, will ensure that the project’s Requirements Mapping
Matrix implementation approach does not impact SMA on the project.
2.1.6.7 The Center SMA Director will ensure that any disagreements between software engineering
or the project office and software assurance are identified, reported, tracked, and if not resolved,
elevated.
2.1.6.8 The designated SMA TA(s) will review, ensure, and concur on software products and
processes throughout the project acquisition, development, delivery, operations, and maintenance.
2.1.7 Contracting Officers
2.1.7.1 Contracting Officers, as defined in FAR 2.101, or Agreement Managers as defined in NAII
1050.3, NASA Partnership Guide, in conjunction with Program/Project Managers shall ensure that
the appropriate FAR, NFS, and other provisions/clauses based on this requirements document and
NASA-STD-8739.8 are included for all NASA contracts, Space Act Agreements, cooperative
agreements, partnership agreements, grants, or other agreements pursuant to which software is being
acquired, developed, modified, operated, or managed for NASA. [SWE-218]
2.1.8 Technical Authorities
2.1.8.1 The TA(s) or Institutional Authority(s) for requirements in this NPR will be defined per NPR
7120.5, Section 3.3.

     Note: Refer to Appendix C (column titled “Authority”) for requirements and their
     associated Technical or Institutional Authority. NASA HQ will designate the TA for
     SWE-032 and SWE-141.

2.1.8.2 The technical and institutional authorities for requirements in this directive shall: [SWE-126]
a. Assess projects’ requirements mapping matrices and tailoring from requirements in this directive
by:

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 16 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 17 of 89


(1) Checking the accuracy of the project’s classification of software components against the
definitions in Appendix D.
(2) Evaluating the project’s Requirements Mapping Matrix for commitments to meet applicable
requirements in this directive, consistent with software classification.
(3) Confirming that requirements marked “Not-Applicable” in the project’s Requirements Mapping
Matrix are not relevant or not capable of being applied.
(4) Determining whether the project’s risks, mitigations, and related requests for relief from
requirements designated with “X” in Appendix C are reasonable and acceptable.
(5) Approving/disapproving requests for relief from requirements designated with “X” in Appendix
C, which falls under this Authority’s scope of responsibility.
(6) Facilitating the processing of projects’ requirements mapping matrices and tailoring decisions
from requirements in this directive, which falls under the responsibilities of a different Authority
(see column titled “Authority” in Appendix C).
(7) Include the SAISO (or delegate) in all software reviews to ensure software cybersecurity is
included throughout software development, testing, maintenance, retirement, operations,
management, acquisition, and assurance activities.
(8) Ensuring that approved requirements mapping matrices, including any tailoring rationale against
this directive, are archived as part of retrievable project records.

     Note: To effectively assess projects’ requirements mapping matrices, the designated Center
     Engineering Technical and Institutional Authorities for this NPR are recognized NASA
     software engineering experts or utilize recognized NASA software engineering experts in
     their decision processes. NASA-HDBK-2203 contains valuable information on each
     requirement, links to relevant NASA Lessons Learned, and guidance on tailoring. Center
     organizations or branches may also share frequently used tailoring and related common
     processes.

b. Indicate the Technical Authority or Technical Authorities approval by signature(s) in the
Requirements Mapping Matrix itself, when the Requirements Mapping Matrix is used to tailor from
the applicable “X” requirement(s).

     Note: The Requirements Mapping Matrix documents the requirements that the project plans
     to meet, “not applicable” requirements, and any tailoring approved by designated
     Authorities with associated justification. If a project wants to tailor a requirement marked
     as HQ TA, then the project is required to get NASA HQ approval (e.g., OCE, OSMA,
     OCIO, or OCHMO) on a tailored request or a software Requirements Mapping Matrix.


2.2 Principles Related to Tailoring Requirements
2.2.1 Software requirements tailoring is the process used to seek relief from NPR requirements
consistent with program or project objectives, acceptable risk, and constraints. To accommodate the

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 17 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 18 of 89


wide variety of software systems and subsystems, application of these requirements to specific
software development efforts may be tailored where justified and approved. To effectively maintain
control over the application of requirements in this directive and to ensure proposed tailoring from
specific requirements are appropriately mitigated, NASA established TA governance. Tailoring
from requirements in this directive are governed by the following requirements, as well as those
defined in NPD 1000.3, The NASA OrganizationNPD 2800.1, NPR 2810.1, NPR 7120.5, NPR
7120.7, NPR 7120.8, NPR 7120.11 and NPR 8715.3 for all of the Agency’s investment areas. The
Technical and Institutional Authority for each requirement in this NPR is documented in the
“Authority” column of Appendix C. The responsible program, project, or operations manager need
to formally accept the tailoring risk. Tailoring decided at the Center level are to consult the Center
ETA, Center SMA TA, Center Health and Medical TA, and the NASA CIO’s Center IT Authority
designee as defined in the requirements mapping matrix. The OSMA has co-approval on any
tailoring decided at the HQ level that involves software. The Office of the Chief Medical Officer
(OCHMO) has co-approval on any tailoring decided that involves software with health and medical
implications. The SAISO, or designee, has co-approval on any tailoring of the cybersecurity
requirements in Section 3.11. For tailoring involving human safety risk, the actual risk taker(s) (or
official spokesperson[s] and appropriate supervisory chain) need to formally agree to assume the
risk. ’
2.2.2 This directive establishes a baseline set of requirements to reduce software engineering risks
on NASA projects and programs. Appendix C defines the default applicability of the requirements
based on software classification. Each project has unique circumstances, and tailoring can be
employed to modify the requirements set appropriate for the software engineering effort. Tailoring
of requirements is based on key characteristics of the software engineering effort, including
acceptable technical and programmatic risk posture, Agency priorities, size, and complexity.
Requirements can be tailored more broadly across a group of similar projects, a program, an
organization, or other collection of similar software development efforts in accordance with NPR
7120.5, Section 3.5.5.
2.2.3 In this directive, the phrase “the project manager shall...” means the roles and responsibilities
of the project manager may be further delegated within the organization to the scope and scale of the
system.
2.2.4 Requirements in this directive are invoked by software classifications as defined in Appendix
C:
a. “X” – Indicates an invoked requirement by this directive consistent with software classification
(ref. SWE-139).
b. Blank – Optional/Not invoked by this directive.
2.2.5 The approval of the Authority designated in Appendix C is required for all tailoring of
requirements designated as “X.” The implementation approach used to meet each requirement is
typically determined by the appropriate software engineering management in conjunction with the
project.

     Note: The request for relief from a requirement includes the rationale, a risk evaluation,
     and reference to all material that justifies supporting acceptance. The organization
     submitting the tailoring request informs the next higher level of involved management in a
     timely manner of the tailoring request. The dispositioning organization reviews the request

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 18 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2                                                                                     Page 19 of 89


     with the other organizations that could be impacted or have a potential risk (i.e., to safety,
     quality, cybersecurity, health) with the proposed changes; and obtains the concurrence of
     those organizations.

2.2.6 Requests for software requirements relief at either the Center or HQ TA level (i.e., partial or
complete relief) may be submitted in the streamlined form of a Requirements Mapping Matrix. The
required signatures from engineering, NASA CIO, and SMA authorities are to be obtained. A
required signature from designated SAISO is required for relief of cybersecurity requirements. If the
Requirements Mapping Matrix is completed and approved in accordance with NPR 7120.5’s
direction on Authority and this directive, it meets the requirements for requesting tailoring.
2.2.7 The engineering, CIO, and SMA authorities shall review and agree with any tailored NPR
7150.2 requirements per the requirements mapping matrix authority column. [SWE-150]
2.2.8 If a system or subsystem development evolves to meet a higher or lower software classification
as defined in Appendix D, then the project manager shall update their plan(s) and initiate
modifications to any supplier contracts to fulfill the applicable requirements per the Requirements
Mapping Matrix in Appendix C with approved tailoring. [SWE-021]




                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter2   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 19 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 20 of 89




Chapter 3: Software Management
Requirements
3.1 Software Life Cycle Planning
3.1.1 Software life cycle planning covers the software aspects of a project from inception through
retirement. The software life cycle planning is an organizing process that considers the software as a
whole and provides the planning activities required to ensure a coordinated, well-engineered process
for defining and implementing project activities. These processes, plans, and activities are
coordinated within the project. At project conception, software needs for the project are analyzed,
including acquisition, supply, development, operation, maintenance, retirement, decommissioning,
and supporting activities and processes. The software effort is scoped, the development processes
defined, measurements defined, and activities are documented in software planning documents.
3.1.2 The project manager shall assess options for software acquisition versus development.
[SWE-033]

     Note: The assessment can include risk, cost, and benefits criteria for each of the options
     listed below:

a. Acquire an off-the-shelf software product that satisfies the requirement.
b. Develop a software product or obtain the software service internally.
c. Develop the software product or obtain the software service through contract.
d. Enhance an existing software product or service.
e. Reuse an existing software product or service.
f. Source code available external to NASA.
See the NASA Software Engineering Handbook for additional detail.
3.1.3 The project manager shall develop, maintain, and execute software plans, including security
plans, that cover the entire software life cycle and, as a minimum, address the requirements of this
directive with approved tailoring. [SWE-013]

     Note: The recommended practices and guidelines for the content of different types of
     software planning activities (whether stand-alone or condensed into one or more project
     level or software documents or electronic files) are defined in NASA-HDBK-2203. The
     project should include, or reference in the software development plans, procedures for
     coordinating the software development and design, and the system or project development
     life cycle.

3.1.4 The project manager shall track the actual results and performance of software activities
                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 20 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 21 of 89


3.1.4 The project manager shall track the actual results and performance of software activities
against the software plans. [SWE-024]
a. Corrective actions are taken, recorded, and managed to closure.
b. Changes to commitments (e.g., software plans) that have been agreed to by the affected groups
and individuals are taken, recorded, and managed.
3.1.5 The project manager shall define and document the acceptance criteria for the software.
[SWE-034]
3.1.6 The project manager shall establish and maintain the software processes, software
documentation plans, list of developed electronic products, deliverables, and list of tasks for the
software development that are required for the project’s software developers, as well as the action
required (e.g., approval, review) of the Government upon receipt of each of the deliverables.
[SWE-036]

     Note: A list of typical software engineering products or electronic data products used on a
     software project is contained in Chapter 6 of this directive. The software activities should
     include plans for software product verification and validation activities, software
     assurance, methods, environments, and criteria for the project.

3.1.7 The project manager shall define and document the milestones at which the software
developer(s) progress will be reviewed and audited. [SWE-037]
3.1.8 The project manager shall require the software developer(s) to periodically report status and
provide insight into software development and test activities; at a minimum, the software
developer(s) will be required to allow the project manager and software assurance personnel to:
[SWE-039]
a. Monitor product integration.
b. Review the verification activities to ensure adequacy.
c. Review trade studies and source data.
d. Audit the software development processes and practices.
e. Participate in software reviews and technical interchange meetings.
3.1.9 The project manager shall require the software developer(s) to provide NASA with software
products, traceability, software change tracking information, and nonconformances in electronic
format, including software development and management metrics. [SWE-040]
3.1.10 The project manager shall require the software developer(s) to provide NASA with electronic
access to the source code developed for the project in a modifiable format. [SWE-042]

     Note: The electronic access requirements for the source code, software products, and
     software process tracking information implies that NASA gets electronic copies of the items
     for use by NASA at NASA facilities. This requirement should include MOTS software,
     ground test software, simulations, ground analysis software, ground control software,

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 21 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 22 of 89


     science data processing software, hardware manufacturing software, and Class E and
     Class F software.

3.1.11 The project manager shall comply with the requirements in this NPR that are marked with an
“X” in Appendix C consistent with their software classification. [SWE-139]
3.1.12 Where approved, the project manager shall document and reflect the tailored requirement in
the plans or procedures controlling the development, acquisition, and deployment of the affected
software. [SWE-121]
3.1.13 Each project manager with software components shall maintain a requirements mapping
matrix or multiple requirements mapping matrices against requirements in this NPR, including those
delegated to other parties or accomplished by contract vehicles or Space Act Agreements.
[SWE-125]

     Note: A project may have multiple software engineering requirements mapping matrices if
     needed for multiple software components on a given project.

     Note: Project relief from an applicable “X” requirement can be granted only by the
     designated TAs, Engineering, and SMA, or, for security issues, the NASA CIO. The record
     of their approval of the tailored requirements in a Requirements Mapping Matrix will be
     indicated by the Authority signature or signatures in the Requirements Mapping Matrix.
     The projects will document their related mitigations and risk acceptance in the approved
     Requirements Mapping Matrix. When the requirement and software class are marked with
     an “X,” the projects record the risk and rationale for any requirements that are entirely or
     partially relieved in the Requirements Mapping Matrix. The CIO has institutional authority
     on all Class F software projects.

3.1.14 The project manager shall satisfy the following conditions when a COTS, GOTS, MOTS,
OSS, or reused software component is acquired or used: [SWE-027]
a. The requirements to be met by the software component are identified.
b. The software component includes documentation to fulfill its intended purpose (e.g., usage
instructions).
c. Proprietary rights, usage rights, ownership, warranty, licensing rights, transfer rights, and
conditions of use (e.g., required copyright, author, and applicable license notices within the software
code, or a requirement to redistribute the licensed software only under the same license (e.g., GNU
GPL, ver. 3, license)) have been addressed and coordinated with Center Intellectual Property
Counsel.
d. Future support for the software product is planned and adequate for project needs.
e. The software component is verified and validated to the same level required to accept a similar
developed software component for its intended use.
f. The project has a plan to perform periodic assessments of vendor reported defects to ensure the
defects do not impact the selected software components.

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 22 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 23 of 89




     Note: The project responsible for procuring off-the-shelf software is responsible for
     documenting, prior to procurement, a plan for verifying and validating the software to the
     same level that would be required for a developed software component. The project ensures
     that the COTS, GOTS, MOTS, reused, and auto-generated code software components and
     data meet the applicable requirements in this directive assigned to its software
     classification as shown in Appendix C.


3.2 Software Cost Estimation
3.2.1 To better estimate the cost of development, the project manager shall establish, document, and
maintain: [SWE-015]
a. Two cost estimate models and associated cost parameters for all Class A and B software projects
that have an estimated project cost of $2 million or more.
b. One software cost estimate model and associated cost parameter(s) for all Class A and Class B
software projects that have an estimated project cost of less than $2 million.
c. One software cost estimate model and associated cost parameter(s) for all Class C and Class D
software projects.
d. One software cost estimate model and associated cost parameter(s) for all Class F software
projects.
3.2.2 The project manager’s software cost estimate(s) shall satisfy the following conditions:
[SWE-151]
a. Covers the entire software life cycle.
b. Is based on selected project attributes (e.g., programmatic assumptions/constraints, assessment of
the size, functionality, complexity, criticality, reuse code, modified code, and risk of the software
processes and products).
c. Is based on the cost implications of the technology to be used and the required maturation of that
technology.
d. Incorporates risk and uncertainty, including end state risk and threat assessments for
cybersecurity.
e. Includes the cost of the required software assurance support.
f. Includes other direct costs.

     Note: In the event of a decision to outsource, it is a best practice that both the acquirer
     (NASA) and the provider (contractor/subcontractor) be responsible for developing software
     cost estimates. For any class of software that has significant risk exposure, consider
     performing at least two cost estimates.



                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 23 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 24 of 89


3.2.3 The project manager shall submit software planning parameters, including size and effort
estimates, milestones, and characteristics, to the Center measurement repository at the conclusion of
major milestones. [SWE-174]

3.3 Software Schedules
3.3.1 The project manager shall document and maintain a software schedule that satisfies the
following conditions: [SWE-016]
a. Coordinates with the overall project schedule.
b. Documents the interactions of milestones and deliverables between software, hardware,
operations, and the rest of the system.
c. Reflects the critical dependencies for software development activities.
d. Identifies and accounts for dependencies with other projects and cross-program dependencies.
3.3.2 The project manager shall regularly hold reviews of software schedule activities, status,
performance metrics, and assessment/analysis results with the project stakeholders and track issues
to resolution. [SWE-018]
3.3.3 The project manager shall require the software developer(s) to provide a software schedule for
the project’s review, and schedule updates as requested. [SWE-046]

3.4 Software Training
3.4.1 The project manager shall plan, track, and ensure project specific software training for project
personnel. [SWE-017]

     Note: This includes any software assurance personnel assigned to the project.


3.5 Software Classification Assessment
s
3.5.1 The project manager shall classify each system and subsystem containing software in
accordance with the highest applicable software classification definitions for Classes A, B, C, D, E,
and F software in Appendix D. [SWE-020]

     Note: The expected applicability of requirements in this directive to specific systems and
     subsystems containing software is determined through the use of the NASA-wide definitions
     for software classes in Appendix D in conjunction with the Requirements Mapping Matrix
     in Appendix C. These definitions are based on (1) usage of the software with or within a
     NASA system, (2) criticality of the system to NASA’s major programs and projects, (3)
     extent to which humans depend upon the system, (4) developmental and operational
     complexity, and (5) extent of the Agency’s investment.

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 24 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 25 of 89




Software assurance may perform an independent software classification, or concur with
engineering’s software classification decision. Software engineering and software assurance
technical authorities need to agree on the classification of each system and subsystem containing
software. If there is a disagreement between the technical authorities, then the dissenting opinion
process for your center should be followed.
3.5.2 The project manager shall maintain records of each software classification determination, each
software Requirements Mapping Matrix, and the results of each software independent classification
assessments for the life of the project. [SWE-176]

3.6 Software Assurance and Software Independent Verification
& Validation
3.6.1 The project manager shall plan and implement software assurance, software safety, and IV&V
(if required) per NASA-STD-8739.8, Software Assurance and Software Safety Standard.
[SWE-022]

     Note: Software assurance activities occur throughout the life of the project. Some of the
     actual analyses and activities may be performed by engineering or the project. Software
     Assurance directions, requirements, and guidance can be found in the NASA-STD-8739.8.

3.6.2 For projects reaching Key Decision Point A, the program manager shall ensure that software
IV&V is performed on the following categories of projects: [SWE-141]
a. Category 1 projects as defined in NPR 7120.5.
b. Category 2 projects as defined in NPR 7120.5, that have Class A or Class B payload risk
classification per NPR 8705.4, Risk Classification for NASA Payloads.
c. Projects selected explicitly by the Mission Directorate Associate Administrator (MDAA) to have
software IV&V.
3.6.3 If software IV&V is required for a project, the project manager, in consultation with NASA
IV&V, shall ensure an IPEP is developed, approved, maintained, and executed in accordance with
IV&V requirements in NASA-STD-8739.8. [SWE-131]

     Note: The IV&V Advisory Board will review the scope of NASA IV&V activities on an
     annual basis as part of the budget planning process.

3.6.4 If software IV&V is performed on a project, the project manager shall ensure that IV&V is
provided access to development artifacts, products, source code, and data required to perform the
IV&V analysis efficiently and effectively. [SWE-178]

     Note: The artifacts and products should be provided electronically in original format (i.e.,
     non-pdf) and, where possible, direct read-only electronic access to project document
                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 25 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 26 of 89


     non-pdf) and, where possible, direct read-only electronic access to project document
     repositories and data stores should be provided. Appropriate security products should be
     completed and transferred as part of the overall package.

3.6.5 If software IV&V is performed on a project, the project manager shall provide responses to
IV&V submitted issues and risks and track these issues and risks to closure. [SWE-179]

3.7 Safety-Critical Software
3.7.1 The project manager, in conjunction with the SMA organization, shall determine if each
software component is considered to be safety-critical per the criteria defined in
NASA-STD-8739.8. [SWE-205]
3.7.2 If a project has safety-critical software, the project manager shall implement the safety-critical
software requirements contained in NASA-STD-8739.8. [SWE-023]
3.7.3 If a project has safety-critical software or mission-critical software, the project manager shall
implement the following items in the software: [SWE-134]
a. The software is initialized, at first start and restarts, to a known safe state.
b. The software safely transitions between all predefined known states.
c. Termination performed by software functions is performed to a known safe state.
d. Operator overrides of software functions require at least two independent actions by an operator.
e. Software rejects commands received out of sequence when execution of those commands out of
sequence can cause a hazard.
f. The software detects inadvertent memory modification and recovers to a known safe state.
g. The software performs integrity checks on inputs and outputs to/from the software system.
h. The software performs prerequisite checks prior to the execution of safety-critical software
commands.
i. No single software event or action is allowed to initiate an identified hazard.
j. The software responds to an off-nominal condition within the time needed to prevent a hazardous
event.
k. The software provides error handling.
l. The software can place the system into a safe state.

     Note: These requirements apply to components that reside in a mission-critical or
     safety-critical system, and the components control, mitigate, or contribute to a hazard as
     well as software used to command hazardous operations/activities.

3.7.4 If a project has safety-critical software, the project manager shall ensure that there is 100

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 26 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 27 of 89


percent code test coverage using the Modified Condition/Decision Coverage (MC/DC) criterion for
all identified safety-critical software components. [SWE-219]

     Note: In MC/DC coverage, every condition in a decision is tested independently to reach
     full coverage. Each condition will be executed twice, once with the results true and once
     with the results of false, but with no difference in the truth values of all other conditions in
     the decision. In addition, it will be shown that each condition independently affects the
     decision. Any deviations from 100 percent should be reviewed and waived with rationale
     by the TAs approval. It is recommended that someone independent of the developer of the
     code under test design and perform this testing to ensure requirement interpretation or
     incorrect assumptions do not escape this testing.

3.7.5 If a project has safety-critical software, the project manager shall ensure all identified
safety-critical software components have a cyclomatic complexity value of 15 or lower. Any
exceedance shall be reviewed and waived with rationale by the project manager or technical
approval authority. [SWE-220]

     Note: Cyclomatic complexity is a metric used to measure the complexity of a software
     program. This metric measures independent paths through the source code. The point of the
     requirement is to minimize risk, minimize testing, and increase reliability associated with
     safety-critical software code components, thus reducing the chance of software failure
     during a hazardous event. The software developer should assess all software safety-critical
     components with a cyclomatic complexity score over 15 for testability, maintainability, and
     code quality. For more guidance on this requirement, see NASA-HDBK-2203.


3.8 Automatic Generation of Software Source Code
3.8.1 The project manager shall define the approach to the automatic generation of software source
code including: [SWE-146]
a. Validation and verification of auto-generation tools.
b. Configuration management of the auto-generation tools and associated data.
c. Description of the limits and the allowable scope for the use of the auto-generated software.
d. Verification and validation of auto-generated source code using the same software standards and
processes as hand-generated code.
e. Monitoring the actual use of auto-generated source code compared to the planned use.
f. Policies and procedures for making manual changes to auto-generated source code.
g. Configuration management of the input to the auto-generation tool, the output of the
auto-generation tool, and modifications made to the output of the auto-generation tools.
3.8.2 The project manager shall require the software developers and custom software suppliers to
provide NASA with electronic access to the models, simulations, and associated data used as inputs

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 27 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 28 of 89


for auto-generation of software. [SWE-206]

     Note: The term electronic access includes access to the data from NASA facilities.


3.9 Software Development Processes and Practices
3.9.1 The CMMI® model is an industry-accepted model of software development practices. It is
utilized to assess how well NASA projects are supported by software development organization(s)
having the necessary skills, practices, and processes in place to produce reliable products within cost
and schedule estimates. The CMMI® model provides NASA with a methodology to:
a. Measure software development organizations against an industry-wide set of best practices that
address software development and maintenance activities applied to products and services.
b. Measure and compare the maturity of an organization’s product development and acquisition
processes with the industry state of the practice.
c. Measure and ensure compliance with the intent of the directive’s process related requirements
using an industry standard approach.
d. Assess internal and external software development organization’s processes and practices.
e. Identify potential risk areas within a given organization’s software development processes and
practices.
3.9.2 The project manager shall acquire, develop, and maintain software from an organization with a
non-expired CMMI®-DEV rating as measured by a CMMI® Institute Certified Lead Appraiser as
follows: [SWE-032]
a. For Class A software: CMMI®-DEV Maturity Level 3 Rating or higher for software.
b. For Class B software (except Class B software on NASA Class D payloads, as defined in NPR
8705.4): CMMI®-DEV Maturity Level 2 Rating or higher for software.

     Note: Organizations need to complete an official CMMI® Institute defined appraisal
     against either the CMMI®-DEV model V1.3 or V2.0. Organizations are to maintain their
     rating and have their results posted on the CMMI® Institute Website, or provide an
     Appraisal Disclosure Statement so that NASA can assess the current maturity/capability
     rating. Software development organizations need to maintain their appraisal rating during
     the period they are responsible for the development and maintenance of the software.
     CMMI® ratings can cover a team, a group, a project, a division, or an entire organization.

For Class B software, an exception can be exercised for those cases in which NASA wishes to
purchase a product from the "best in class provider," but the best in class provider does not have the
required CMMI® rating. For Class B software, instead of a CMMI® rating by a development
organization, the project will conduct an evaluation, performed by a qualified evaluator selected by
the Center ETA, against the CMMI®-DEV Maturity Level 2 practices, and mitigate any risk, if
deficiencies are identified in the evaluation. If this approach is used, the development organization

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 28 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 29 of 89


and project are responsible for correcting the deficiencies identified in the evaluation. When this
exception is exercised, the OCE and Center ETA are notified of the proposition and provided the
results of the evaluation. The project manager should seek guidance from the Office of Procurement
(OP) for help in exercising the exception.

3.10 Software Reuse
3.10.1 The project manager shall specify reusability requirements that apply to its software
development activities to enable future reuse of the software, including the models, simulations, and
associated data used as inputs for auto-generation of software, for U.S. Government purposes.
[SWE-147]
3.10.2 The project manager shall evaluate software for potential reuse by other projects across
NASA and contribute reuse candidates to the appropriate NASA internal sharing and reuse software
system. However, if the project manager is not a civil servant, then a civil servant will pre-approve
all such software contributions; all software contributions should include, at a minimum, the
following information: [SWE-148]
a. Software Title.
b. Software Description.
c. The Civil Servant Software Technical POC for the software product.
d. The language or languages used to develop the software.
e. Any third-party code contained therein, and the record of the requisite license or permission
received from the third party permitting the Government’s use and any required markings (e.g.,
required copyright, author, applicable license notices within the software code, and the source of
each third-party software component (e.g., software URL & license URL)), if applicable.

     Note: Currently, there are more than one Agency-wide software inventories and
     repositories, several options can be found in NASA-HDBK-2203. In order to obtain and
     reuse the internal software reuse candidates from these repositories, NASA civil servants
     may request a copy by requesting and completing a simple Acknowledgment of Receipt of
     the software form that identifies any restrictions on NASA’s right to use the software,
     including limiting its use to governmental purposes only. The Civil Servant Software
     Technical POC for the software product will keep a list of all contributors to the software.
     Any software shared will contain appropriate disclaimer and indemnification provisions
     (e.g., in a “README” file) stating that the software may be subject to U.S. export control
     restrictions, and it is provided “as is” without any warranty, express, or implied and that
     the recipient waives any claims against, and indemnifies and holds harmless, NASA and its
     contractors and subcontractors (see paragraph 2.1.5.17).

f. Release notes.
3.10.3 In accordance with NPD 2091.1, Inventions Made by Government Employees, NASA Civil
Servant employees who make an invention embodied by software will submit to NASA a disclosure
of such invention. Likewise, such inventions made by NASA contractors will be reported to NASA,

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 29 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                     Page 30 of 89


preferably through the NASA electronic New Technology Report (e-NTR) system, pursuant to the
terms of their respective contract. Such disclosures are made through the NASA e-NTR system
available at http://invention.nasa.gov/.

3.11 Software Cybersecurity
3.11.1 Software defects are a central and critical aspect of computer security vulnerabilities.
Software defects with cybersecurity ramifications include implementation bugs such as buffer
overflows and design flaws such as inconsistent error handling.

     Note: Software security relies on high-quality code development and testing practices
     (clean code, modular structure, well-defined interfaces) – anything that reduces error rates
     and opportunities for misinterpretation or error; considers both the development and
     deployment/operational context for the software; has the ability to rapidly assess, triage,
     correct, and deploy security-related updates while the software is in
     deployment/operations.

3.11.2 The project manager shall perform a software cybersecurity assessment on the software
components per the Agency security policies and the project requirements, including risks posed by
the use of COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, or reused software components. [SWE-156]
3.11.3 The project manager shall identify cybersecurity risks, along with their mitigations, in flight
and ground software systems and plan the mitigations for these systems. [SWE-154]

     Note: Project Protection Plans describe the program’s approach for planning and
     implementing the requirements for information, physical, personnel, industrial, and
     counterintelligence/counterterrorism security, and for security awareness/education
     requirements in accordance with NPR 1600.1, NASA Security Program Procedural
     Requirements, NPD 1600.2, the NASA Security Policy, NPD 2810.1, and NPR 2810.1.
     Include provisions in the plan to protect personnel, facilities, mission-essential
     infrastructure, and critical program information from potential threats and vulnerabilities
     that may be identified during the threat and vulnerability assessment process.

3.11.4 The project manager shall implement protections for software systems with communications
capabilities against unauthorized access per the requirements contained in the NASA-STD-1006,
Space System Protection Standard. [SWE-157]
3.11.5 The project manager shall test the software and record test results for the required software
cybersecurity mitigation implementations identified from the security vulnerabilities and security
weaknesses analysis. [SWE-159]

     Note: Include assessments for security vulnerabilities during Peer Review/Inspections of
     software requirements and design. Utilize automated security static analysis as well as
     coding standard static analyses of software code to find potential security vulnerabilities.


                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 30 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3                                                                                         Page 31 of 89


3.11.6 The project manager shall identify, record, and implement secure coding practices.
[SWE-207]
3.11.7 The project manager shall verify that the software code meets the project’s secure coding
standard by using the results from static analysis tool(s). [SWE-185]

     Note: If a static analysis tool will not work with the selected coding standard, other
     methods are acceptable, including manual inspection.

3.11.8 The project manager shall identify software requirements for the collection, reporting, and
storage of data relating to the detection of adversarial actions. [SWE-210]

     Note: Monitoring of key software observables (e.g., number of failed login attempts,
     performance changes, internal communication changes) is needed to detect adversarial
     actions that threaten mission success. When an adversarial action occurs, it should be
     reported. Raw event data should be further analyzed to determine whether an anomalous
     event represents an attack, and if so, the nature of the attack.


3.12 Software Bi-Directional Traceability
3.12.1 The project manager shall perform, record, and maintain bi-directional traceability between
the following software elements: [SWE-052]

                          Table 1. Bi-directional traceability by software classification

                                                                                   Class A, B,
                     Bi-directional Traceability                                                      Class D Class F
                                                                                     and C
 Higher-level requirements to the software requirements                                   X                     X
 Software requirements to the system hazards                                              X               X
 Software requirements to the software design components                                  X
 Software design components to the software code                                          X
 Software requirements to the software verification(s)                                    X               X     X
 Software requirements to the software non-conformances                                   X               X     X


     Note: The project manager will maintain bi-directional traceability between the software
     requirements and software-related system hazards, including hazardous controls,
     hazardous mitigations, hazardous conditions, and hazardous events.




                               This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter3     incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check     Page 31 of 89
                            the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                   this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 32 of 89




Chapter 4: Software Engineering Life Cycle
Requirements
4.1 Software Requirements
4.1.1 The requirements phase is one of the most critical phases of software engineering. Studies
show that the top problems in the software industry are due to poor requirements elicitation,
inadequate requirements specification, and inadequate management of changes to requirements.
Requirements provide the foundation for the entire life cycle, as well as for the software product.
Requirements also provide a basis for planning, estimating, and monitoring. Requirements are based
on customer, user, and other stakeholder needs and design and development constraints. The
development of requirements includes elicitation, analysis, documentation, verification, and
validation. Ongoing customer validation of the requirements to ensure the end products meet
customer needs is an integral part of the life cycle process. Customer validation can be
accomplished via rapid prototyping and customer-involved reviews of iterative and final software
requirements.
4.1.2 The project manager shall establish, capture, record, approve, and maintain software
requirements, including requirements for COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, or reused software
components, as part of the technical specification. [SWE-050]

     Note: The software technical requirements definition process is used to transform the
     baselined stakeholder expectations into unique, quantitative, and measurable technical
     software requirements that can be used for defining a design solution for the software end
     products and related enabling products. This process also includes validation of the
     requirements to ensure that the requirements are well-formed (clear and unambiguous),
     complete (agrees with customer and stakeholder needs and expectations), consistent
     (conflict free), and individually verifiable and traceable to a higher level requirement.
     Recommended content for a software specification can be found in NASA-HDBK-2203.

4.1.3 The project manager shall perform software requirements analysis based on flowed-down and
derived requirements from the top-level systems engineering requirements, safety and reliability
analyses, and the hardware specifications and design. [SWE-051]
4.1.4 The project manager shall include software related safety constraints, controls, mitigations, and
assumptions between the hardware, operator, and software in the software requirements
documentation. [SWE-184]
4.1.5 The project manager shall track and manage changes to the software requirements. [SWE-053]
4.1.6 The project manager shall identify, initiate corrective actions, and track until closure
inconsistencies among requirements, project plans, and software products. [SWE-054]
4.1.7 The project manager shall perform requirements validation to ensure that the software will
perform as intended in the customer environment. [SWE-055]


                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 32 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 33 of 89




4.2 Software Architecture
4.2.1 Experience confirms that the quality and longevity of a software-reliant system is primarily
determined by its architecture. The software architecture underpins a system’s software design and
code; it represents the earliest design decisions, ones that are difficult and costly to change later. The
transformation of the derived and allocated requirements into the software architecture results in the
basis for all software development work.
4.2.2 A software architecture:
a. Formalizes precise subsystem decompositions.
b. Defines and formalizes the dependencies among software work products within the integrated
system.
c. Serves as the basis for evaluating the impacts of proposed changes.
d. Maintains rules for use by subsequent software engineers that ensure a consistent software system
as the work products evolve.
e. Provides a stable structure for use by future groups through the documentation of the architecture,
its views and patterns, and its rules.
f. Follows guidelines created by the NASA Space Asset and the Enterprise Protection Program to
protect mission architectures.
g. Documents the valid and invalid modes or states of operation within the software requirements.
4.2.3 The project manager shall transform the requirements for the software into a recorded software
architecture. [SWE-057]

     Note: A documented software architecture that describes: the software’s structure;
     identifies the software qualities (i.e., performance, modifiability, and security); identifies
     the known interfaces between the software components and the components external to the
     software (both software and hardware); identifies the interfaces between the software
     components and identifies the software components. Reference NASA’s Software
     Architecture Review Board (SARB) paper NTRS ID 20160005787, “Quality Attributes for
     Mission Flight Software: A Reference for Architects.”

4.2.4 The project manager shall perform a software architecture review on the following categories
of projects: [SWE-143]
a. Category 1 Projects as defined in NPR 7120.5.
b. Category 2 Projects as defined in NPR 7120.5, that have Class A or Class B payload risk
classification per NPR 8705.4.

4.3 Software Design

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 33 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 34 of 89


4.3.1 Software design is the process of defining the software architecture, components, modules,
interfaces, and data for a software system to satisfy specified requirements. The software architecture
is the fundamental organization of a system embodied in its components, their relationships to each
other and the environment, and the principles guiding its design and evolution. The software
architectural design is concerned with creating a strong overall structure for software entities that
fulfill the allocated system and software-level requirements. Typical views captured in an
architectural design include the decomposition of the software subsystem into design entities,
computer software configuration items, definitions of external and internal interfaces, dependency
relationships among entities and system resources, and finite state machines. The design should be
further refined into lower-level entities that permit the implementation by coding in a programming
language. Typical attributes that are documented for lower-level entities include the identifier, type,
purpose, function, constraints, subordinates, dependencies, interface, resources, processing, and
data. Rigorous specification languages, graphical representations, and related tools have been
developed to support the evaluation of critical properties at the design level. Projects are encouraged
to take advantage of these improved design techniques to prevent and eliminate errors as early in the
life cycle as possible. Software, developed or purchased, has additional requirements to comply with
from Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, as defined inNPR 2800.2.
4.3.2 The project manager shall develop, record, and maintain a software design based on the
software architectural design that describes the lower-level units so that they can be coded,
compiled, and tested. [SWE-058]

4.4 Software Implementation
4.4.1 Software implementation consists of implementing the requirements and design into code, data,
and records. Software implementation also consists of following coding methods and standards. Unit
testing is also usually a part of software implementation (unit testing can also be conducted during
the testing phase).
4.4.2 The project manager shall implement the software design into software code. [SWE-060]
4.4.3 The project manager shall select, define, and adhere to software coding methods, standards,
and criteria. [SWE-061]
4.4.4 The project manager shall use static analysis tools to analyze the code during the development
and testing phases to, at a minimum, detect defects, software security, code coverage, and software
complexity. [SWE-135]

     Note: Although no maximum cyclomatic complexity score is required for non-safety critical
     software, all software projects should regularly collect and maintain complexity metrics
     and use them to manage risk, either when high-complexity code must be modified, or
     proactively to improve the overall quality and maintenance of the code base. For safety
     critical software, the analysis should take into account the requirements for cyclomatic
     complexity and code coverage as defined in 3.7.5 and 3.7.4 respectively.

4.4.5 The project manager shall unit test the software code. [SWE-062]

     Note: For safety critical software, the unit testing should follow the requirement
                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 34 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 35 of 89


     Note: For safety critical software, the unit testing should follow the requirement
     established in 3.7.4 of this document.

4.4.6 The project manager shall assure that the unit test results are repeatable. [SWE-186]
4.4.7 The project manager shall provide a software version description for each software release.
[SWE-063]
4.4.8 The project manager shall validate and accredit the software tool(s) required to develop or
maintain software. [SWE-136]

     Note: All software development tools contain some number of software defects. Validation
     and accreditation of the critical software development and maintenance tools ensure that
     the tools being used during the software development life cycle do not generate or insert
     errors in the software executable components. Software tool accreditation is the
     certification that a software tool is acceptable for use for a specific purpose. Accreditation
     is conferred by the organization best positioned to make the judgment that the software tool
     in question is acceptable. The likelihood that work products will function properly is
     enhanced, and the risk of error is reduced if the tools used in the development and
     maintenance processes have been validated and accredited themselves.


4.5 Software Testing
4.5.1 The purpose of testing is to verify the software functionality and remove defects. Testing
verifies the code against the requirements and the design to ensure that the requirements are
implemented. Testing also identifies problems and defects that are corrected and tracked to closure
before product delivery. Testing also validates that the software operates appropriately in the
intended environment. Please note for Class A software there are additional software test
requirements and software integration requirements as defined in NPR 8705.2.
4.5.2 The project manager shall establish and maintain: [SWE-065]
a. Software test plan(s).
b. Software test procedure(s).
c. Software test(s), including any code specifically written to perform test procedures.
d. Software test report(s).
4.5.3 The project manager shall test the software against its requirements. [SWE-066]

     Note: A best practice for Class A, B, and C software projects is to have formal software
     testing planned, conducted, witnessed, and approved by an independent organization
     outside of the development team.

4.5.4 The project manager shall place software items under configuration management prior to
testing. [SWE-187]
                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 35 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 36 of 89




     Note: This includes the software components being tested and the software components
     being used to test the software, including components such as support software, models,
     simulations, ground support software, COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, or reused software
     components.

4.5.5 The project manager shall evaluate test results and record the evaluation. [SWE-068]
4.5.6 The project manager shall use validated and accredited software models, simulations, and
analysis tools required to perform qualification of flight software or flight equipment. [SWE-070]

     Note: Information regarding specific V&V techniques and the analysis of models and
     simulations can be found in NASA-STD-7009, Standard for Models and Simulations,
     NASA-HDBK-7009, Handbook for Models and Simulations, or discipline-specific
     recommended practice guides.

4.5.7 The project manager shall update the software test and verification plan(s) and procedure(s) to
be consistent with software requirements. [SWE-071]
4.5.8 The project manager shall validate the software system on the targeted platform or high-fidelity
simulation. [SWE-073]

     Note: Typically, a high-fidelity simulation has the exact processor, processor performance,
     timing, memory size, and interfaces as the target system.

4.5.9 The project manager shall ensure that the code coverage measurements for the software are
selected, implemented, tracked, recorded, and reported. [SWE-189]

     Note: This requirement can be met by running unit, integration, and validation tests;
     measuring the code coverage; and achieving the code coverage by additional (requirement
     based) tests, inspection, or analysis.

If the project does not get 100 percent structural coverage, it means one of four things and each
requires action on the project manager’s part:
• Requirement missing - the code that hasn’t been covered is performing an essential activity, but no
requirement indicates that this should be done;
• Test missing - the code that hasn’t been covered relates to an existing requirement, but no test was
implemented for it;
• Extraneous/dead code – the code that hasn’t been covered is not traceable to any requirement and
isn’t needed by the software;
• Deactivated code - the code that hasn’t been covered isn’t traceable to any requirements for the
current system, but is intended to be executed in specific configurations.
                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 36 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 37 of 89


current system, but is intended to be executed in specific configurations.
The code coverage data and any rationale for uncovered code should be presented and reviewed at
major project milestones.
4.5.10 The project manager shall verify code coverage is measured by analysis of the results of the
execution of tests. [SWE-190]

     Note: If it can be justified that the required percentage cannot be achieved by test
     execution, the analysis, inspection, or review of design can be applied to the non-covered
     code. The goal of the complementary analysis is to assess that the non-covered code
     behavior is as expected.

4.5.11 The project manager shall plan and conduct software regression testing to demonstrate that
defects have not been introduced into previously integrated or tested software and have not
produced a security vulnerability. [SWE-191]
4.5.12 The project manager shall verify through test the software requirements that trace to a
hazardous event, cause, or mitigation technique. [SWE-192]
4.5.13 The project manager shall develop acceptance tests for loaded or uplinked data, rules, and
code that affects software and software system behavior. [SWE-193]

     Note: These acceptance tests should validate and verify the data, rules, and code for
     nominal and off-nominal scenarios.

4.5.14 The project manager shall test embedded COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, or reused software
components to the same level required to accept a custom developed software component for its
intended use. [SWE-211]

4.6 Software Operations, Maintenance, and Retirement
4.6.1 Planning for operations, maintenance, and retirement are typically considered throughout the
software life cycle. Operational concepts and scenarios are derived from customer requirements and
validated in the operational or simulated environment. Software maintenance activities sustain the
software product after the product is delivered to the customer until retirement.
4.6.2 The project manager shall plan and implement software operations, maintenance, and
retirement activities. [SWE-075]
4.6.3 The project manager shall complete and deliver the software product to the customer with
appropriate records, including as-built records, to support the operations and maintenance phase of
the software’s life cycle. [SWE-077]
4.6.4 The project manager shall complete, prior to delivery, verification that all software
requirements identified for this delivery have been met or dispositioned, that all approved changes
have been implemented, and that all defects designated for resolution prior to delivery have been
resolved. [SWE-194]

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 37 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4                                                                                     Page 38 of 89



4.6.5 The project manager shall maintain the software using standards and processes per the
applicable software classification throughout the maintenance phase. [SWE-195]
4.6.6 The project manager shall identify the records and software tools to be archived, the location
of the archive, and procedures for access to the products for software retirement or disposal.
[SWE-196]




                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter4   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 38 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5                                                                                     Page 39 of 89




Chapter 5: Supporting Software Life Cycle
Requirements
5.1 Software Configuration Management (SCM)
5.1.1 Software Configuration Management (SCM) is the process of applying configuration
management throughout the software life cycle to ensure the completeness and correctness of
software configuration items. SCM applies technical and administrative direction and surveillance to
identify and record the functional and physical characteristics of software configuration items,
control changes to those characteristics, record and report change processing and implementation
status, and verify compliance with specified requirements. SCM establishes and maintains the
integrity of the products of a software project throughout the software life cycle. Use of standard
Center or organizational SCM processes and procedures is encouraged where applicable.
5.1.2 The project manager shall develop a software configuration management plan that describes
the functions, responsibilities, and authority for the implementation of software configuration
management for the project. [SWE-079]
5.1.3 The project manager shall track and evaluate changes to software products. [SWE-080]
5.1.4 The project manager shall identify the software configuration items (e.g., software records,
code, data, tools, models, scripts) and their versions to be controlled for the project. [SWE-081]

     Note: The items to be controlled include tools, items, or settings used to develop the
     software, which could impact the software. Examples of such items include
     compiler/assembler versions, makefiles, batch files, and specific environment settings.

5.1.5 The project manager shall establish and implement procedures to: [SWE-082]
a. Designate the levels of control through which each identified software configuration item is
required to pass.
b. Identify the persons or groups with authority to authorize changes.
c. Identify the persons or groups to make changes at each level.

     Note: IEEE 828-2012, IEEE Standard for Configuration Management in Systems and
     Software Engineering describes configuration management processes to be established,
     how they are to be accomplished, who is responsible for doing specific activities, when they
     are to happen, and what specific resources are required. It addresses configuration
     management activities over a product’s life cycle. Configuration management in systems
     and software engineering is a specialty discipline within the larger discipline of
     configuration management. Configuration management is essential to systems engineering
     and software engineering.


                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 39 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5                                                                                     Page 40 of 89


5.1.6 The project manager shall prepare and maintain records of the configuration status of software
configuration items. [SWE-083]
5.1.7 The project manager shall perform software configuration audits to determine the correct
version of the software configuration items and verify that they conform to the records that define
them. [SWE-084]
5.1.8 The project manager shall establish and implement procedures for the storage, handling,
delivery, release, and maintenance of deliverable software products. [SWE-085]
5.1.9 The project manager shall participate in any joint NASA/developer audits. [SWE-045]

5.2 Software Risk Management
The project manager shall record, analyze, plan, track, control, and communicate all of the software
risks and mitigation plans. [SWE-086]

     Note: Project managers should be aware of any risks that remain after mitigations have
     been completed or after a risk has been accepted.


5.3 Software Peer Reviews and Inspections
5.3.1 Software peer reviews and inspections are the in-process technical examination of work
products by peers to find and eliminate defects early in the life cycle. Software peer reviews and
inspections are performed following defined procedures covering the preparation for the review, the
review itself is conducted, results are recorded, results are reported, and completion criteria is
certified. When planning the composition of a software peer review or inspection team, consider
including software testing, system testing, software assurance, software safety, software
cybersecurity, and software IV&V personnel.
5.3.2 The project manager shall perform and report the results of software peer reviews or software
inspections for: [SWE-087]
a. Software requirements.
b. Software plans, including cybersecurity.
c. Any design items that the project identified for software peer review or software inspections
according to the software development plans.
d. Software code as defined in the software and or project plans.
e. Software test procedures.

     Note: Software peer reviews or software inspections are recommended best practices for all
     safety and mission-success related software components. Recommended best practices and
     guidelines for software formal inspections are contained in NASA-STD-8739.9, Software
     Formal Inspection Standard.


                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 40 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5                                                                                     Page 41 of 89




5.3.3 The project manager shall, for each planned software peer review or software inspection:
[SWE-088]
a. Use a checklist or formal reading technique (e.g., perspective-based reading) to evaluate the work
products.
b. Use established readiness and completion criteria.
c. Track actions identified in the reviews until they are resolved.
d. Identify the required participants.
5.3.4 The project manager shall, for each planned software peer review or software inspection,
record necessary measurements. [SWE-089]

5.4 Software Measurements
5.4.1 Software measurement is a primary tool for managing software processes and evaluating the
quality of software products. Analysis of measures provides insight into the capability of the
software organization and identifies opportunities for software process and product improvements.
Software measurement programs at multiple levels are established to meet measurement objectives.
The requirements below are designed to reinforce the use of measurement at the project, Center
software organization, and NASA Chief Engineer levels to assist in managing projects, assuring
quality, and improving software engineering practices. Measurement programs are designed to meet
the following goals:
a. Improve future software planning and software cost estimation.
b. Describe and record information about a software product during its life cycle.
c. Assist usability and maintainability of a software product.
d. Monitor and control software life cycle processes.
e. Communicate information about the system, software product, or service.
f. Provide a history, including lessons learned, during the development and maintenance to support
management and process improvement.
g. Provide evidence that the processes were followed.
h. Provide indicators of software quality.
i. Track the status of software engineering improvement and assurance programs.
j. Report the status of software engineering improvements and assurance programs to Center
software organizations and Center SMA.
5.4.2 The project manager shall establish, record, maintain, report, and utilize software management
and technical measurements. [SWE-090]



                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 41 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5                                                                                     Page 42 of 89


     Note: The NASA-HDBK-2203 contains a set of candidate management indicators that may
     be used on a software development project. The NASA Chief Engineer may identify and
     document additional Center measurement objectives, software measurements, collection
     procedures and guidelines, and analysis procedures for selected software projects and
     software development organizations. The software measurement process includes
     collecting software technical measurement data from the project’s software developer(s).

5.4.3 The project manager shall analyze software measurement data collected using documented
project-specified and Center/organizational analysis procedures. [SWE-093]
5.4.4 The project manager shall provide access to the software measurement data, measurement
analyses, and software development status as requested to the sponsoring Mission Directorate, the
NASA Chief Engineer, the Center Technical Authorities, HQ SMA, and other organizations as
appropriate. [SWE-094]
5.4.5 The project manager shall monitor measures to ensure the software will meet or exceed
performance and functionality requirements, including satisfying constraints. [SWE-199]

     Note: The metrics could include planned and actual use of computer hardware resources
     (such as processor capacity, memory capacity, input/output device capacity, auxiliary
     storage device capacity, and communications/network equipment capacity, bus traffic,
     partition allocation) over time. As part of the verification of the software detailed design,
     the developer will update the estimation of the technical resource metrics. As part of the
     verification of the coding, testing, and validation, the technical resource metrics will be
     updated with the measured values and will be compared to the margins.

5.4.6 The project manager shall collect, track, and report software requirements volatility metrics.
[SWE-200]

5.5 Software Non-conformance or Defect Management
5.5.1 The project manager shall track and maintain software non-conformances (including defects in
tools and appropriate ground software). [SWE-201]
5.5.2 The project manager shall define and implement clear software severity levels for all software
non-conformances (including tools, COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, reused software components, and
applicable ground systems). [SWE-202]

     Note: At a minimum, classes should include loss of life or loss of vehicle, mission success,
     visible to the user with operational workarounds, and an ‘other’ class that does not meet
     previous criteria.

5.5.3 The project manager shall implement mandatory assessments of reported non-conformances
for all COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, and/or reused software components. [SWE-203]



                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 42 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5                                                                                     Page 43 of 89


     Note: This includes operating systems, run-time systems, device drivers, code generators,
     compilers, math libraries, and build and Configuration Management (CM) tools. It should
     be performed pre-flight, with mandatory code audits for critical defects.

5.5.4 The project manager shall implement process assessments for all high-severity software
non-conformances (closed loop process). [SWE-204]




                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter5   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 43 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter6                                                                                     Page 44 of 89




Chapter 6: Recommended Software Records
Content
6.1 Software Engineering Products
It is possible to prepare a plan, associated procedures, and reports, as well as numerous records,
requests, descriptions, and specifications for each software development life cycle process. When
deciding how to prepare any of these items, consider the users of the information first. Reviewing
and understanding the requirements, needs, and background of users and stakeholders are essential
to applying the recommendations for the content of software records defined in NASA-HDBK-2203.
Specific content within these records may not apply to every project. Use of NASA Center and
contractor formats in document deliverables is acceptable if the required content (as defined by the
project) is addressed. Product records should be reviewed and updated as necessary. Typical
software engineering products or electronic data include:
a. Software Development Plan/Software Management Plan.
b. Software Schedule.
c. Software Cost Estimate.
d. Software Configuration Management Plan.
e. Software Change Reports.
f. Software Test Plans.
g. Software Test Procedures.
h. Software Test Reports.
i. Software Version Description Reports.
j. Software Maintenance Plan.
k. Software Assurance Plan(s).
l. Software Safety Plan.
m. Software Requirements Specification.
n. Software Data Dictionary.
o. Software and Interface Design Description (Architectural Design).
p. Software Design Description.
q. Software User’s Manual.
r. Records of Continuous Risk Management for Software.
s. Software Measurement Analysis Results.

                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter6   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 44 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter6                                                                                     Page 45 of 89



t. Record of Software Engineering Trade-off Criteria & Assessments (make/buy decision).
u. Software Acceptance Criteria and Conditions.
v. Software Status Reports.
w. Programmer’s/Developer’s Manual.
x. Software Reuse Report.
y. Software Model and Simulation Data and Documentation, including the Verification, Validation,
and Credibility Plan for Software Model and Simulation.

6.2 Software Engineering Product Content
The recommendations for the content of software records are defined in NASA-HDBK-2203. The
Software Engineering handbook also provides guidance regarding when these records should be
drafted, baselined, and updated. Examples and templates for these records and datasets are on the
Software Process Across NASA (SPAN) Web site, accessible at
https://nen.nasa.gov/web/software/wiki .




                             This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- Chapter6   incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 45 of 89
                          the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                 this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 46 of 89




Appendix A. Definitions
Accredit. The official acceptance of a software development tool, model, or simulation (including
associated data) to use for a specific purpose.
Analysis. The post-processing or interpretation of the individual values, arrays, files of data, or
execution information. It is a careful study of something to learn about its parts, what they do, and
how they are related to each other.
Assure. When personnel makes certain that the specified software engineering, software
management, and software assurance activities have been performed by others.
Bidirectional Traceability. Association among two or more logical entities that are discernible in
either direction (to and from an entity). (ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765, Systems and software engineering –
Vocabulary)
Code coverage. The percentage of the software that has been executed (covered) by the test suite.
Commercial Off-the-Shelf Software (COTS). The software product is available for purchase and
use without the need to conduct development activities. COTS solutions, as opposed to
custom-developed solutions, are typically readily available in the commercial marketplace and ready
for use as purchased.
Computer. A functional unit that can perform substantial computations, including numerous
arithmetic operations and logic operations.
Computer Software Configuration Item. An aggregation of software that is designated for
configuration management and treated as a single entity in the configuration management process.
Computer System. A system containing one or more computers and associated software. (Source:
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765)
Condition. (1) Measurable qualitative or quantitative attribute that is stipulated for a requirement
and that indicates a circumstance or event under which a requirement applies (Systems and software
engineering--Systems and software assurance--Part 1: Concepts and vocabulary ISO/IEC/IEEE
15026-1:2019, 3.1.5), (2) Description of a contingency to be considered in the representation of a
problem or a reference to other procedures to be considered as part of the condition (Information
processing -- Specification of single-hit decision tables, ISO 5806:1984, 3.6), and (3) Boolean
expression containing no Boolean operators (Software and systems engineering -- Software testing
-- Part 4: Test techniques, ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119-4:2015, 4.6).
Contracted Software. Software created for a project by a contractor or subcontractor.
Cybersecurity. The protection of information and information systems from unauthorized access,
use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide confidentiality, integrity,
and availability.
Cyclomatic Complexity. Cyclomatic complexity is a software metric used to indicate the
complexity of a program. It is a quantitative measure of the number of linearly independent paths
through a function’s source code.


                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 46 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 47 of 89


Data. Information for computer processing (e.g., numbers, text, images, and sounds in a form that is
suitable for storage in or processing by a computer).
Defect. Any occurrence in a software product that is determined to be incomplete or incorrect
relative to the software requirements, expectations for the software, and/or program standards.
(Source: NASA-STD-8739.9)
Embedded Computer System. A computer system that is part of a larger system and performs
some of the requirements of that system. (Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765)
Embedded Software. Software that is part of a larger system and performs some of the
requirements of that system. (Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765)
Ensure. To secure or guarantee, to make sure or certain.
Establish and Maintain. Formulation, documentation, use/deployment, and current maintenance of
the object (usually a document, requirement, process, or policy) by the responsible project,
organization, or individual.
Failure. The behavior of the software or system component when a fault is encountered, producing
an incorrect or undesired effect of a specified severity. (Source: NASA-STD-8739.9)
Fault. The manifestation of an error in software that may cause a failure. (Source:
NASA-STD-8719.24 Annex)
Freeware. Software that is proprietary and that is available for use at no monetary cost. In other
words, freeware may be used without payment but may usually not be modified, re-distributed, or
reverse-engineered without the author’s permission.
Glueware. Software created to connect the off-the-shelf software/reused software with the rest of
the system. It may take the form of software that modifies interfaces or add missing functionality,
“firewalls” that isolate the off-the-shelf software, or software that check inputs and outputs to the
off-the-shelf software and may modify to prevent failures.
Government Off-the-Shelf Software. Government Off-the-Shelf Software refers to
Government-created software, usually from another project. The software was not created by the
current developers (see software reuse). Usually, the source code is included and documentation,
including test and analysis results, is available; (e.g., the Government is responsible for the
Government off-the-shelf (GOTS) software to be incorporated into another system).
Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V). Verification and validation performed by an
organization that is technically, managerially, and financially independent of the development
organization. (Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765) The NASA requirements for IV&V are defined in the
NASA-STD-8739.8.
Information Technology. Any equipment or interconnected system or subsystem of equipment that
is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management, movement, control,
display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by an executive
agency. IT also includes computers, ancillary equipment (including imaging peripherals, input,
output, and storage devices necessary for security and surveillance), peripheral equipment designed
to be controlled by the central processing unit of a computer; software; firmware; and similar
procedures, services (including support services), and related resources, but does not include any
equipment acquired by a Federal contractor incidental to a Federal contract. (Source: NPR 7120.7)

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 47 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 48 of 89



Insight. An element of Government surveillance that monitors contractor compliance using
Government-identified metrics and contracted milestones. Insight is a continuum that can range
from low intensity such as reviewing quarterly reports to high intensity such as performing surveys
and reviews. (Source: NPR 7123.1)
Legacy and Heritage Software. Software products (architecture, code, requirements) written
specifically for one project and then, without prior planning during its initial development, found to
be useful for other projects. See software reuse.
Major Engineering/Research Facility. Used in this document to show research, development, test,
or simulation facilities representing a significant NASA investment (facilities with a Current
Replace Value equal to or greater than 50 million dollars) which contains software that supports
programs and projects managed under NPR 7120.5, NPR 7120.7, or NPR 7120.8, and that have a
Mission Dependency Index value equal to or greater than 70.
MC/DC. Modified condition/decision coverage ( MC/DC) is a code coverage criterion used in
software testing. MC/DC requires all of the below during testing: Each condition in a decision is
shown to independently affect the outcome of the decision. Independence of a condition is shown by
proving that only one condition changes at a time.
Mission Critical. Item or function that should retain its operational capability to assure no mission
failure (i.e., for mission success - meeting all mission objectives and requirements for performance
and safety). (Source: NPR 8715.3)
Mission Critical Software. Software that can cause, contribute to, or mitigate the loss of
capabilities that are essential to the primary mission objectives.
Mobile Application. A mobile application is an application built using native code for the device or
a software Web application that is distributed through the device specific marketplace. Web
applications presented via a mobile browser are not considered mobile applications.
Model. A description or representation of a system, entity, phenomena, or process. (Source:
NASA-STD-7009) Only for this document, the term “model” refers to models implemented in
software.
Modified Off-the-Shelf Software (MOTS). When COTS or legacy and heritage software is reused,
or heritage software is changed, the product is considered “modified.” The changes can include all
or part of the software products and may involve additions, deletions, and specific alterations. An
argument can be made that any alterations to the code and design of an off-the-shelf software
component constitute “modification,” but the common usage allows for some percentage (less than
five percent of the code changes) of change before the off-the-shelf software is declared to be
modified off-the-shelf (MOTS) software. Modified Off-the-Shelf Software may include the changes
to the application shell or glueware to add or protect against certain features and not to the
off-the-shelf software system code directly. When less than 30 percent of the existing code changes,
the product can be considered “modified.” If more than 30 percent of the code changes or if the new
code is added, the software should be considered a new software development.
Off-the-Shelf Software. Software not developed in-house or by a contractor for the specific project
now underway. The software is developed for a purpose different from the current project. Used in
practice as an umbrella for COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS, freeware, shareware, trial software,
demonstration software, legacy software, heritage software, and reuse software.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 48 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 49 of 89



Open-Source Software. Software where its human-readable source code is made broadly available
without cost under an OSS license, which provides conditions for use, reuse,
modification/improvement, and redistribution; and often where the software development,
management, and planning is done publicly, or easily observable by an individual or organization
not previously connected with its open source project.
Primary Mission Objectives. Outcomes expected to be accomplished, which are closely associated
with the reason the mission was proposed, funded, developed, and operated (e.g., objectives related
to top-level requirements or their flow down).
Process Asset Library. A collection of process asset holdings that may be used by an organization
or project. (Source: CMMI® for Systems Engineering/Software Engineering/Integrated Product and
Process Development Supplier Sourcing.)
Program. A strategic investment by a Mission Directorate or Mission Support Office that has a
defined architecture and technical approach, requirements, funding level, and a management
structure that initiates and directs one or more projects. A program defines a strategic direction that
the Agency has identified as critical.
Programmable Logic Device. A semiconductor device based on a matrix of configurable logic
blocks connected via a configurable interconnect. The circuitry (combinational/sequential logic,
memory/storage, input/output) in a PLD is configured to meet design requirements for a desired
application after device manufacturing.
Project. A specific investment having defined goals, objectives, requirements, life cycle cost, a
beginning, and an end. A project yields new or revised products or services that directly address
NASA’s strategic needs. They may be performed wholly in-house; by Government, industry,
academia partnerships; or through contracts with private industry.
Project Manager. A generic term that represents the position in charge of the project. A project
manager could be designated as a project lead, project principal investigator, project scientist,
research director, project executive, or some other term, as defined in the project’s governing
document. A project manager is responsible for the formulation and implementation of the R&T
project, per the governing document in coordination with the program manager. (NPR 7120.5
defines the roles and responsibilities for this position).
Requirements Volatility. The total number of requirements compared to requirement changes over
time. It may include additions, changes, and reduction of requirements.
Risk Management. An organized, systematic decision-making process that efficiently identifies,
analyzes, plans, tracks, controls, communicates, and documents risk to increase the likelihood of
achieving program/project goals. (Source: NPR 8715.3)
Safety Critical. A term describing any condition, event, operation, process, equipment, or system
that could cause or lead to severe injury, major damage, or mission failure if performed or built
improperly, or allowed to remain uncorrected. (Source NPR 8715.3)
Scripts. A sequence of automated computer commands embedded in a program that tells the
program to execute a specific procedure (e.g., files with monitoring, logic, or commands used by
software to automate a process or procedure).
Simulation. The imitation of the behavioral characteristics of a system, entity, phenomenon, or

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 49 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 50 of 89


process. (Source: NASA-STD-7009) Only for the purpose of this document, the term “simulation”
refers to only those simulations that are implemented in software.
Shareware. Software that is available free of charge and often distributed informally for evaluation,
after which a fee may be requested for continued use.
Software. In this directive, “software” is defined as (1) computer programs, procedures, and
associated documentation and data pertaining to the operation of a computer system (IEEE
828-2012, 2.1), (2) all or a part of the programs, procedures, rules, and associated documentation of
an information processing system (ISO/IEC 19770-5:2015, Information technology, 3.34), (3)
program or set of programs used to run a computer (ISO/IEC 26514:2008, Systems and software
engineering–requirements for designers and developers of user documentation, 4.46) (4) all or part
of the programs which process or support the processing of digital information (ISO/IEC
19770-1:2017, Information technology – IT asset management – Part 1: IT asset management
systems--Requirements, 3.49), and (5) part of a product that is the computer program or the set of
computer programs (ISO/IEC/IEEE 26513:2017, Systems and software engineering–requirements
for testers and reviewers of information for users, 3.34). This definition applies to software
developed by NASA, software developed for NASA, software maintained by or for NASA, COTS,
GOTS, MOTS, OSS, reused software components, auto-generated code, embedded software, the
software executed on processors embedded in programmable logic devices (see
NASA-HDBK-4008), legacy, heritage, applications, freeware, shareware, trial or demonstration
software, and open-source software components.
Software Architecture. The software architecture of a program or computing system is the structure
or structures of the system, which comprise software components, the properties of those
components, and the relationships between them. The term also refers to documentation of a
system’s software architecture. Documenting software architecture facilitates communication
between stakeholders, documents early decisions about high-level design, and allows reuse of design
components and patterns between projects.
Software Assurance. The planned and systematic set of activities that ensure that software life
cycle processes and products conform to requirements, standards, and procedures. For NASA, this
includes the disciplines of Software Quality (functions of Software Quality Engineering, Software
Quality Assurance, and Software Quality Control), Software Safety, Software Reliability, Mission
Software Cybersecurity Assurance, Software Verification and Validation, and IV&V.
Software Engineering. The application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the
development, operation, and maintenance of software (i.e., the application of engineering to
software). (Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765)
Software Item. Source code, object code, control code, control data, or a collection of these items.
Software Maintenance. (1) Totality of activities required to provide cost-effective support to a
software system. (2) Entitlement of additional rights (such as additional functionality, upgrade, or
support) for a previously granted software entitlement. (3) A set of services a Publisher can sell to a
Customer for the ongoing development and delivery of software bug fixes and product upgrades.
Software Peer Review and Inspection. A visual examination of a software product to detect and
identify software anomalies, including errors and deviations from standards and specifications.
(Source: IEEE 1028). Refer to NASA-STD-8739.9 for guidelines for software peer reviews or
inspections.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 50 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 51 of 89


Software Reuse. A software product developed for one use but having other uses or one developed
specifically to be usable on multiple projects or in multiple roles on one project. Examples include,
but are not limited to, COTS products, acquirer-furnished software products, software products in
reuse libraries, and pre-existing developer software products.
Software Suppliers. An organization or individual that enters into an agreement with the acquirer
for the supply of a software product or service or individual or organization that enters into a
contract with the acquirer for the supply of a software system, software product, or software service
under the terms of the contract or an organization or part of an organization or individual that enters
into an agreement with the application management organization for the supply of a software
product or software service. Software Suppliers includes NASA in-house software development.
Software Validation. Confirmation that the product, as provided (or as it will be provided), fulfills
its intended use. In other words, validation ensures that “you built the right thing.” (Source: IEEE
1012, IEEE Standard for Software Verification and Validation)
Software Verification. Confirmation that products properly reflect the requirements specified for
them. In other words, verification ensures that “you built it right.” (Source: IEEE 1012)
Static Analysis. The process of evaluating a system or component based on its form, structure,
content, or documentation. (Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765)
Subsystem. A secondary or subordinate system within a larger system. (Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE
24765)
System. The combination of elements that function together to produce the capability required to
meet a need. The elements include hardware, software, equipment, facilities, personnel, processes,
and procedures needed for this purpose. (Source: NPR 7123.1)
Tailoring. The process used to adjust a prescribed requirement to accommodate the needs of a
specific task or activity (e.g., program or project). Tailoring may result in changes, subtractions, or
additions to a typical implementation of the requirement.
Uncertainty. (1) The estimated amount or percentage by which an observed or calculated value may
differ from the true value. (2) A broad and general term used to describe an imperfect state of
knowledge or a variability resulting from a variety of factors including, but not limited to, lack of
knowledge, the applicability of information, physical variation, randomness or stochastic behavior,
indeterminacy, judgment, and approximation. (Source: NPR 8000.4, Agency Risk Management
Procedural Requirements).
Unit Test. (1) Testing of individual routines and modules by the developer or an independent tester
(ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765). (2) A test of individual programs or modules in order to ensure that there are
no analysis or programming errors (ISO/IEC 2382-20). (3) Test of individual hardware or software
units or groups of related units. (ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765)
Validation. (1) Confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that the requirements for
a specific intended use or application have been fulfilled (ISO/IEC 25000:2014 Systems and
software Engineering--Systems and software product Quality Requirements and Evaluation
(SQuaRE) -- Guide to SQuaRE, 4.41) (ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207:2017 Systems and software
engineering--Software life cycle processes, 3.1.71) (ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015 Systems and
software engineering--System life cycle processes, 4.1.53) (ISO/IEC TS 24748-1:2016 Systems and
software engineering--Life cycle management--Part 1: Guide for life cycle management, 2.61), (2)

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 51 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA                                                                                   Page 52 of 89


process of providing evidence that the system, software, or hardware and its associated products
satisfy requirements allocated to it at the end of each life cycle activity, solve the right problem (e.g.,
correctly model physical laws, implement business rules, and use the proper system assumptions),
and satisfy intended use and user needs (IEEE 1012-2016, IEEE Standard for Software Verification
and Validation, 3.1.35), (3) the assurance that a product, service, or system meets the needs of the
customer and other identified stakeholders. It often involves acceptance and suitability with external
customers. (A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide) -- Fifth
Edition), and (4) process of evaluating a system or component during or at the end of the
development process to determine whether it satisfies specified requirements (IEEE 1012-2016,
IEEE Standard for Software Verification and Validation, 3.1) Note: Validation in a system life cycle
context is the set of activities ensuring and gaining confidence that a system is able to accomplish its
intended use, goals, and objectives. The right system has been built. Validation demonstrates that the
system can be used by the users for their specific tasks. “Validated” is used to designate the
corresponding status. [ISO 9000] Multiple validations can be carried out if there are different
intended uses.




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixA incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 52 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixB                                                                                   Page 53 of 89



Appendix B. Acronyms
CAD/CAM                Computer-Aided Design/and Computer-Aided Manufacturing
CE                     Chief Engineer
CHMO                   Chief Health and Medical Officer
CIO                    Chief Information Officer
CMMI®                  Capability Maturity Model® Integration
CMMI®-DEV              Capability Maturity Model® Integration® (CMMI®) for evelopment
CMU                    Carnegie Mellon University
CO                     Contracting Officer
COR                    Contracting Officer Representative
COTS                   Commercial-Off-the-Shelf
CSCI                   Computer Software Configuration Item
CSMA                   Chief, Safety and Mission Assurance
EDL                    Entry, Descent, and Landing
ETA                    Engineering Technical Authority
EVA                    Extra Vehicular Activity
FAR                    Federal Acquisition Regulations
FFRDC                  Federally Funded Research and Development Center
GOTS                   Government-Off-the-Shelf
HDBK                   Handbook
IEEE                   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IPEP                   IV&V Project Execution Plan
IT                     Information Technology
IV&V                   Independent Verification and Validation
JPL                    Jet Propulsion Laboratory
KSLOC                  Kilo/Thousand Source Lines of Code
MC/DC                  Modified Condition/Decision Coverage
MDAA                   Mission Directorate Associate Administrator
MOTS                   Modified Off-the-Shelf
NASA                   National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NPD                    NASA Policy Directive

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixB incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 53 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixB                                                                                   Page 54 of 89


NPR                    NASA Procedural Requirements
NTR                    New Technology Report
OCE                    Office of the Chief Engineer
OCHMO                  Office of Chief Health and Medical Officer
OCIO                   Office of Chief Information Officer
OP                     Office of Procurement
OSMA                   Office of Safety and Mission Assurance
OSS                    Open-Source Software
PLD                    Programmable Logic Devices
POC                    Point of Contact
SAISO                  Senior Agency Information Security Officer
SCM                    Software Configuration Management
SEI                    Software Engineering Institute
SMA                    Safety and Mission Assurance
SOW                    Statement of Work
SPAN                   Software Process Across NASA
SWE                    Software Engineering
TA                     Technical Authority
US                     United States
WBS                    Work Breakdown Structure




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixB incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 54 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                   Page 55 of 89




Appendix C. Requirements Mapping Matrix
C.1 The rationale for the requirements is contained in the NASA-HDBK-2203. Programs/Projects
may substitute a matrix that documents their mapping with their particular Center’s implementation
of NPR 7150.2, if applicable. See NASA-HDBK-2203 for requirements mapping matrices organized
by class, tailoring field for each requirement, tailoring rationale, and approval signature lines.
C.2 The Requirements Mapping Matrix documents the program/project’s mappings or intent to
comply with the requirements of this NPR or justification for tailoring. The matrix lists:
a. The section reference.
b. The unique requirement identifier.
c. The NPR 7150.2 requirement statement.
d. The Authority Level responsible for assessing a project’s requirements mapping matrices and any
requested tailoring from requirements in this NPR. The CIO, or the designee, has institutional
authority on all Class F software projects and has joint responsibility on the cybersecurity
requirements in Section 3.11.
e. The applicability of the requirements in this NPR to specific systems and subsystems within the
Agency’s investment areas, programs, and projects is determined through the use of the NASA-wide
definition of software classes.
C.3 Tailoring Guidance
X - Indicates an invoked requirement by this NPR consistent with Software Classification (ref.
SWE-139). May be tailored with TA approval (ref. Chapter 2.2).
Blank - Optional/Not invoked by this NPR.
Center - Center Director or the Center Director’s designated ETA, the Center Director’s designated
SMA TA, and the CHMO designated for Health and Medical TA. The NASA CIO, or the designee,
has institutional authority on all Class F software projects and has joint responsibility with the ETA
on the cybersecurity requirements in Section 3.11 per the direction in the Requirements Mapping
Matrix.
CIO - The NASA CIO, or the designee Center CIO, has institutional authority on all Class F
software projects and has joint responsibility with the ETA on the cybersecurity requirements in
section 3.11, per the direction in the Requirements Mapping Matrix.
Each requirement marked ‘X’ for the project’s software classification(s) should be addressed in the
Requirements Mapping Matrix. All requirements can be tailored per the guidance in this directive.
Requirements that are not applicable to a given project, such as the IV&V requirements, should be
tailored out in the Requirements Mapping Matrix with justification.

                                     Table 2. Requirements Mapping Matrix




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 55 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 56 of 89



                                                                   Class
         SWE                      Requirement                                                               Class F
 Section                                                            A-E     A B C D E                                F
          #                          Text                                                                  Authority
                                                                  Authority
 3.0                   Software Management
                       Requirements
 3.1                   Software Life Cycle Planning
 3.1.2       033       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       assess options for software
                       acquisition versus
                       development.
 3.1.3       013       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       develop, maintain, and execute
                       software plans, including
                       security plans, that cover the
                       entire software life cycle and,
                       as a minimum, address the
                       requirements of this directive
                       with approved tailoring.
 3.1.4       024       The project manager shall track Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       the actual results and
                       performance of software
                       activities against the software
                       plans.
                       a. Corrective actions are taken,
                       recorded, and managed to
                       closure.
                       b. Changes to commitments
                       (e.g., software plans) that have
                       been agreed to by the affected
                       groups and individuals are
                       taken, recorded, and managed.
 3.1.5       034       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       define and document the
                       acceptance criteria for the
                       software.
 3.1.6       036       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       establish and maintain the
                       software processes, software
                       documentation plans, list of
                       developed electronic products,
                       deliverables, and list of tasks

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 56 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 57 of 89

                       deliverables, and list of tasks
                       for the software development
                       that are required for the
                       project’s software developers,
                       as well as the action required
                       (e.g., approval, review) of the
                       Government upon receipt of
                       each of the deliverables.
 3.1.7       037       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       define and document the
                       milestones at which the
                       software developer(s) progress
                       will be reviewed and audited.
 3.1.8       039       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X                   CIO       X
                       require the software
                       developer(s) to periodically
                       report status and provide
                       insight into software
                       development and test activities;
                       at a minimum, the software
                       developer(s) will be required to
                       allow the project manager and
                       software assurance personnel
                       to:
                       a. Monitor product integration.
                       b. Review the verification
                       activities to ensure adequacy.
                       c. Review trades studies and
                       source data.
                       d. Audit the software
                       development processes and
                       practices.e. Participate in
                       software reviews and technical
                       interchange meetings.
 3.1.9       040       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       require the software
                       developer(s) to provide NASA
                       with software products,
                       traceability, software change
                       tracking information and
                       nonconformances in electronic
                       format, including software
                       development and management
                       metrics.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 57 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 58 of 89



 3.1.10      042       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       require the software
                       developer(s) to provide NASA
                       with electronic access to the
                       source code developed for the
                       project in a modifiable format.
 3.1.11      139       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       comply with the requirements
                       in this NPR that are marked
                       with an “X” in Appendix C
                       consistent with their software
                       classification.
 3.1.12      121       Where approved, the project                Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       manager shall document and
                       reflect the tailored requirement
                       in the plans or procedures
                       controlling the development,
                       acquisition, and deployment of
                       the affected software.
 3.1.13      125       Each project manager with     Center                      X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       software components shall
                       maintain a requirements
                       mapping matrix or multiple
                       requirements mapping matrices
                       against requirements in this
                       NPR, including those
                       delegated to other parties or
                       accomplished by contract
                       vehicles or Space Act
                       Agreements.
 3.1.14      027       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X                   CIO       X
                       satisfy the following conditions
                       when a COTS, GOTS, MOTS,
                       OSS, or reused software
                       component is acquired or used:
                       a. The requirements to be met
                       by the software component are
                       identified.
                       b. The software component
                       includes documentation to
                       fulfill its intended purpose
                       (e.g., usage instructions).
                       c. Proprietary rights, usage

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 58 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                   Page 59 of 89

                       c. Proprietary rights, usage
                       rights, ownership, warranty,
                       licensing rights, transfer rights,
                       and conditions of use (e.g.,
                       required copyright, author, and
                       applicable license notices
                       within the software code, or a
                       requirement to redistribute the
                       licensed software only under
                       the same license (e.g., GNU
                       GPL, ver. 3, license)) have
                       been addressed and
                       coordinated with Center
                       Intellectual Property Counsel.
                       d. Future support for the
                       software product is planned
                       and adequate for project needs.
                       e. The software component is
                       verified and validated to the
                       same level required to accept a
                       similar developed software
                       component for its intended use.
                       f. The project has a plan to
                       perform periodic assessments
                       of vendor reported defects to
                       ensure the defects do not
                       impact the selected software
                       components.
 3.2                   Software Cost Estimation
 3.2.1       015       To better estimate the cost of             Center         X X X X                       X
                       development, the project
                       manager shall establish,
                       document, and maintain:
                       a. Two cost estimate models
                       and associated cost parameters
                       for all Class A and B software
                       projects that have an estimated
                       project cost of $2 million or
                       more.
                       b. One software cost estimate
                       model and associated cost
                       parameter(s) for all Class A
                       and Class B software projects
                       that have an estimated project
                       cost of less than $2 million.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 59 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 60 of 89

                       cost of less than $2 million.
                       c. One software cost estimate
                       model and associated cost
                       parameter(s) for all Class C
                       and Class D software projects.
                       d. One software cost estimate
                       model and associated cost
                       parameter(s) for all Class F
                       software projects.
 3.2.2       151       The project manager’s software Center                     X X X X                   CIO       X
                       cost estimate(s) shall satisfy
                       the following conditions:
                       a. Covers the entire software
                       life cycle.
                       b. Is based on selected project
                       attributes (e.g., programmatic
                       assumptions/constraints,
                       assessment of the size,
                       functionality, complexity,
                       criticality, reuse code,
                       modified code, and risk of the
                       software processes and
                       products).
                       c. Is based on the cost
                       implications of the technology
                       to be used and the required
                       maturation of that technology.
                       d. Incorporates risk and
                       uncertainty, including end state
                       risk and threat assessments for
                       cybersecurity.
                       e. Includes the cost of the
                       required software assurance
                       support.
                       f. Includes other direct costs.
 3.2.3       174       The project manager shall      Center                     X X X X
                       submit software planning
                       parameters, including size and
                       effort estimates, milestones,
                       and characteristics, to the
                       Center measurement repository
                       at the conclusion of major
                       milestones.
 3.3                   Software Schedules

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 60 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 61 of 89



 3.3.1       016       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       document and maintain a
                       software schedule that satisfies
                       the following conditions:
                       a. Coordinates with the overall
                       project schedule.
                       b. Documents the interactions
                       of milestones and deliverables
                       between software, hardware,
                       operations, and the rest of the
                       system.
                       c. Reflects the critical
                       dependencies for software
                       development activities.
                       d. Identifies and accounts for
                       dependencies with other
                       projects and cross-program
                       dependencies.
 3.3.2       018       The project manager shall       Center                    X X X                     CIO       X
                       regularly hold reviews of
                       software schedule activities,
                       status, performance metrics,
                       and assessment/analysis results
                       with the project stakeholders
                       and track issues to resolution.
 3.3.3       046       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       require the software
                       developer(s) to provide a
                       software schedule for the
                       project’s review and schedule
                       updates as requested.
 3.4                   Software Training
 3.4.1       017       The project manager shall plan, Center                    X X X                     CIO       X
                       track, and ensure project
                       specific software training for
                       project personnel.
 3.5                   Software Classification
                       Assessments




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 61 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 62 of 89



 3.5.1       020       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       classify each system and
                       subsystem containing software
                       in accordance with the highest
                       applicable software
                       classification definitions for
                       Classes A, B, C, D, E, and F
                       software in Appendix D.
 3.5.2       176       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       maintain records of each
                       software classification
                       determination, each software
                       Requirements Mapping Matrix,
                       and the results of each software
                       independent classification
                       assessments for the life of the
                       project.
 3.6                   Software Assurance and
                       Software Independent
                       Verification & Validation
 3.6.1       022       The project manager shall plan Center                     X X X X X
                       and implement software
                       assurance, software safety, and
                       IV&V (if required) per
                       NASA-STD-8739.8, Software
                       Assurance and Software Safety
                       Standard.
 3.6.2       141       For projects reaching Key       HQ                        X X
                       Decision Point A, the program OSMA
                       manager shall ensure that
                       software IV&V is performed
                       on the following categories of
                       projects:
                       a. Category 1 projects as
                       defined in NPR 7120.5.
                       b. Category 2 projects as
                       defined in NPR 7120.5 that
                       have Class A or Class B
                       payload risk classification per
                       NPR 8705.4.
                       c. Projects selected explicitly
                       by the NASA Chief, Safety and
                       Mission Assurance to have

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 62 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                   Page 63 of 89

                       Mission Assurance to have
                       software IV&V.
 3.6.3       131       If software IV&V is performed Center                      X X
                       on a project, the project
                       manager shall ensure an IPEP
                       is developed, approved,
                       maintained, and executed in
                       accordance with the IV&V
                       criteria defined in
                       NASA-STD-8739.8.
 3.6.4       178       If software IV&V is performed Center                      X X
                       on a project, the project
                       manager shall ensure that
                       IV&V is provided access to
                       development artifacts,
                       products, source code, and data
                       required to perform the IV&V
                       analysis efficiently and
                       effectively.
 3.6.5       179       If software IV&V is performed Center                      X X
                       on a project, the project
                       manager shall provide
                       responses to IV&V submitted
                       issues and risks, and track
                       these issues and risks to
                       closure.
 3.7                   Safety-critical Software
 3.7.1       205       The project manager, in          Center                   X X X X X
                       conjunction with the SMA
                       organization, shall determine if
                       each software component is
                       considered to be safety-critical
                       per the criteria defined in
                       NASA-STD-8739.8.
 3.7.2       023       If a project has safety-critical           Center         X X X X
                       software, the project manager
                       shall implement the
                       safety-critical software
                       requirements contained in
                       NASA-STD-8739.8.




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 63 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                   Page 64 of 89



 3.7.3       134       If a project has safety-critical   Center                 X X X X
                       software or mission-critical
                       software, the project manager
                       shall implement the following
                       items in the software:
                       a. The software is initialized, at
                       first start and restarts, to a
                       known safe state.
                       b. The software safely
                       transitions between all
                       predefined known states.
                       c. Termination performed by
                       software functions is
                       performed to a known safe
                       state.
                       d. Operator overrides of
                       software functions require at
                       least two independent actions
                       by an operator.
                       e. Software rejects commands
                       received out of sequence when
                       execution of those commands
                       out of sequence can cause a
                       hazard.
                       f. The software detects
                       inadvertent memory
                       modification and recovers to a
                       known safe state.
                       g. The software performs
                       integrity checks on inputs and
                       outputs to/from the software
                       system.
                       h. The software performs
                       prerequisite checks prior to the
                       execution of safety-critical
                       software commands.
                       i. No single software event or
                       action is allowed to initiate an
                       identified hazard.
                       j. The software responds to an
                       off-nominal condition within
                       the time needed to prevent a
                       hazardous event.
                       k. The software provides error
                       handling.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 64 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 65 of 89

                       handling.
                       l. The software can place the
                       system into a safe state.
 3.7.4       219       If a project has safety-critical           Center         X X X X
                       software, the project manager
                       shall ensure that there is 100
                       percent code test coverage
                       using the Modified
                       Condition/Decision Coverage
                       (MC/DC) criterion for all
                       identified safety-critical
                       software components.
 3.7.5       220       If a project has safety-critical           Center         X X X X
                       software, the project manager
                       shall ensure all identified
                       safety-critical software
                       components have a cyclomatic
                       complexity value of 15 or
                       lower. Any exceedance shall
                       be reviewed and waived with
                       rationale by the project
                       manager or technical approval
                       authority.
 3.8                   Automatic Generation of Software Source Code
 3.8.1       146       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X                     CIO       X
                       define the approach to the
                       automatic generation of
                       software source code including:
                       a. Validation and verification
                       of auto-generation tools.
                       b. Configuration management
                       of the auto-generation tools
                       and associated data.
                       c. Description of the limits and
                       the allowable scope for the use
                       of the auto-generated software.
                       d. Verification and validation
                       of auto-generated source code
                       using the same software
                       standards and processes as
                       hand-generated code.
                       e. Monitoring the actual use of
                       auto-generated source code
                       compared to the planned use.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 65 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 66 of 89

                       compared to the planned use.
                       f. Policies and procedures for
                       making manual changes to
                       auto-generated source code.
                       g. Configuration management
                       of the input to the
                       auto-generation tool, the output
                       of the auto-generation tool, and
                       modifications made to the
                       output of the auto-generation
                       tools.
 3.8.2       206       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X                   CIO       X
                       require the software developers
                       and custom software suppliers
                       to provide NASA with
                       electronic access to the models,
                       simulations, and associated
                       data used as inputs for
                       auto-generation of software.
 3.9                   Software Development Processes and Practices
 3.9.2       032       The project manager shall        HQ OCE                   X X
                       acquire, develop, and maintain and HQ
                       software from an organization OSMA
                       with a non-expired
                       CMMI®-DEV rating as
                       measured by a CMMI®
                       Institute Certified Lead
                       Appraiser as follows:
                       a. For Class A software:
                       CMMI®-DEV Maturity Level
                       3 Rating or higher for software.
                       b. For Class B software (except
                       Class B software on NASA
                       Class D payloads, as defined in
                       NPR 8705.4): CMMI®-DEV
                       Maturity Level 2 Rating or
                       higher for software.
 3.10                  Software Reuse
 3.10.1      147       The project manager shall         Center                  X X X X                   CIO       X
                       specify reusability
                       requirements that apply to its
                       software development
                       activities to enable future reuse

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 66 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 67 of 89

                       activities to enable future reuse
                       of the software, including the
                       models, simulations, and
                       associated data used as inputs
                       for auto-generation of
                       software, for U.S. Government
                       purposes.
 3.10.2      148       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       evaluate software for potential
                       reuse by other projects across
                       NASA and contribute reuse
                       candidates to the appropriate
                       NASA internal sharing and
                       reuse software system.
                       However, if the project
                       manager is not a civil servant,
                       then a civil servant will
                       pre-approve all such software
                       contributions; all software
                       contributions should include,
                       at a minimum, the following
                       information:
                       a. Software Title.
                       b. Software Description.
                       c. The Civil Servant Software
                       Technical POC for the
                       software product.
                       d. The language or languages
                       used to develop the software.
                       e. Any third party code
                       contained therein and the
                       record of the requisite license
                       or permission received from
                       the third party permitting the
                       Government’s use and any
                       required markings (e.g.,
                       required copyright, author,
                       applicable license notices
                       within the software code, and
                       the source of each third-party
                       software component (e.g.,
                       software URL & license
                       URL)), if applicable.
                       f. Release notes.
 3.11                  Software Cybersecurity

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 67 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 68 of 89



 3.11.2      156       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X X                 CIO       X
                       perform a software                         and
                       cybersecurity assessment on                Center
                       the software components per                CIO
                       the Agency security policies
                       and the project requirements,
                       including risks posed by the
                       use of COTS, GOTS, MOTS,
                       OSS, or reused software
                       components.
 3.11.3      154       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X
                       identify cybersecurity risks,              and
                       along with their mitigations, in           Center
                       flight and ground software                 CIO
                       systems and plan the
                       mitigations for these systems.
 3.11.4      157       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X
                       implement protections for                  and
                       software systems with                      Center
                       communications capabilities                CIO
                       against unauthorized access per
                       the requirements contained in
                       the Space System Protection
                       Standard, NASA-STD-1006.
 3.11.5      159       The project manager shall test             Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       the software and record test               and
                       results for the required                   Center
                       software cybersecurity                     CIO
                       mitigation implementations
                       identified from the security
                       vulnerabilities and security
                       weaknesses analysis.
 3.11.6      207       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X
                       identify, record, and                      and
                       implement secure coding                    Center
                       practices.                                 CIO
 3.11.7      185       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       verify that the software code              and
                       meets the project’s secure                 Center
                       coding standard by using the               CIO
                       results from static analysis
                       tool(s).

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 68 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 69 of 89



 3.11.8      210       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       identify software requirements
                       for the collection, reporting,
                       and storage of data relating to
                       the detection of adversarial
                       actions.
 3.12                  Software Bi-Directional Traceability
 3.12.1      052       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       perform, record, and maintain
                       bi-directional traceability
                       between the following
                       software elements: (See Table
                       in 3.12.1)
 4.0                   Software Engineering (Life Cycle) Requirements
 4.1                   Software Requirements
 4.1.2       050       The project manager shall       Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       establish, capture, record,
                       approve, and maintain software
                       requirements, including
                       requirements for COTS,
                       GOTS, MOTS, OSS, or reused
                       software components, as part
                       of the technical specification.
 4.1.3       051       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X
                       perform software requirements
                       analysis based on flowed-down
                       and derived requirements from
                       the top-level systems
                       engineering requirements,
                       safety and reliability analyses,
                       and the hardware
                       specifications and design.
 4.1.4       184       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       include software related safety
                       constraints, controls,
                       mitigations and assumptions
                       between the hardware,
                       operator, and software in the
                       software requirements
                       documentation.


                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 69 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 70 of 89



 4.1.5       053       The project manager shall track Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       and manage changes to the
                       software requirements.
 4.1.6       054       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       identify, initiate corrective
                       actions, and track until closure
                       inconsistencies among
                       requirements, project plans,
                       and software products.
 4.1.7       055       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       perform requirements
                       validation to ensure that the
                       software will perform as
                       intended in the customer
                       environment.
 4.2                   Software Architecture
 4.2.3       057       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       transform the requirements for
                       the software into a recorded
                       software architecture.
 4.2.4       143       The project manager shall       Center                    X X X
                       perform a software architecture
                       review on the following
                       categories of projects:
                       a. Category 1 Projects as
                       defined in NPR 7120.5.
                       b. Category 2 Projects as
                       defined in NPR 7120.5 that
                       have Class A or Class B
                       payload risk classification per
                       NPR 8705.4.
 4.3                   Software Design
 4.3.2       058       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       develop, record, and maintain
                       a software design based on the
                       software architectural design
                       that describes the lower-level
                       units so that they can be
                       coded, compiled, and tested.
 4.4                   Software Implementation


                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 70 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 71 of 89



 4.4.2       060       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       implement the software design
                       into software code.
 4.4.3       061       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       select, define, and adhere to
                       software coding methods,
                       standards, and criteria.
 4.4.4       135       The project manager shall use              Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       static analysis tools to analyze
                       the code during the
                       development and testing
                       phases to, at a minimum,
                       detect defects, software
                       security, code coverage, and
                       software complexity.
 4.4.5       062       The project manager shall unit             Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       test the software code.
 4.4.6       186       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       assure that the unit test results
                       are repeatable.
 4.4.7       063       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       provide a software version
                       description for each software
                       release.
 4.4.8       136       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       validate and accredit the
                       software tool(s) required to
                       develop or maintain software.
 4.5                   Software Testing
 4.5.2       065       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X                   CIO       X
                       establish and maintain:
                       a. Software test plan(s).
                       b. Software test procedure(s).
                       c. Software test(s), including
                       any code specifically written to
                       perform test procedures.
                       d. Software test report(s).
 4.5.3       066       The project manager shall test             Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       the software against its
                       requirements.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 71 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 72 of 89



 4.5.4       187       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       place software items under
                       configuration management
                       prior to testing.
 4.5.5       068       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       evaluate test results and record
                       the evaluation.
 4.5.6       070       The project manager shall use              Center         X X X
                       validated and accredited
                       software models, simulations,
                       and analysis tools required to
                       perform qualification of flight
                       software or flight equipment.
 4.5.7       071       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       update the software test and
                       verification plan(s) and
                       procedure(s) to be consistent
                       with software requirements.
 4.5.8       073       The project manager shall       Center                    X X X
                       validate the software system on
                       the targeted platform or
                       high-fidelity simulation.
 4.5.9       189       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X
                       ensure that the code coverage
                       measurements for the software
                       are selected, implemented,
                       tracked, recorded, and
                       reported.
 4.5.10      190       The project manager shall          Center                 X X X
                       verify code coverage is
                       measured by analysis of the
                       results of the execution of tests.
 4.5.11      191       The project manager shall plan             Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       and conduct software
                       regression testing to
                       demonstrate that defects have
                       not been introduced into
                       previously integrated or tested
                       software and have not
                       produced a security
                       vulnerability.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 72 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 73 of 89



 4.5.12      192       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X
                       verify through test the software
                       requirements that trace to a
                       hazardous event, cause, or
                       mitigation technique.
 4.5.13      193       The project manager shall                  Center         X X                       CIO       X
                       develop acceptance tests for
                       loaded or uplinked data, rules,
                       and code that affects software
                       and software system behavior.
 4.5.14      211       The project manager shall test Center                     X X X
                       embedded COTS, GOTS,
                       MOTS, OSS, or reused
                       software components to the
                       same level required to accept a
                       custom developed software
                       component for its intended use.
 4.6                   Software Operations,
                       Maintenance, and Retirement
 4.6.2       075       The project manager shall plan             Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       and implement software
                       operations, maintenance, and
                       retirement activities.
 4.6.3       077       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       complete and deliver the
                       software product to the
                       customer with appropriate
                       records, including as-built
                       records, to support the
                       operations and maintenance
                       phase of the software’s life
                       cycle.
 4.6.4       194       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X                   CIO       X
                       complete, prior to delivery,
                       verification that all software
                       requirements identified for this
                       delivery have been met or
                       dispositioned, that all approved
                       changes have been
                       implemented and that all
                       defects designated for
                       resolution prior to delivery

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 73 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 74 of 89

                       resolution prior to delivery
                       have been resolved.
 4.6.5       195       The project manager shall       Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       maintain the software using
                       standards and processes per the
                       applicable software
                       classification throughout the
                       maintenance phase.
 4.6.6       196       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       identify the records and
                       software tools to be archived,
                       the location of the archive, and
                       procedures for access to the
                       products for software
                       retirement or disposal.
 5.0                   Supporting Software Life Cycle Requirements
 5.1                   Software Configuration Management
 5.1.2       079       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       develop a software
                       configuration management
                       plan that describes the
                       functions, responsibilities, and
                       authority for the
                       implementation of software
                       configuration management for
                       the project.
 5.1.3       080       The project manager shall track Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       and evaluate changes to
                       software products.
 5.1.4       081       The project manager shall         Center                  X X X X                   CIO       X
                       identify the software
                       configuration items (e.g.,
                       software records, code, data,
                       tools, models, scripts) and their
                       versions to be controlled for
                       the project.
 5.1.5       082       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       establish and implement
                       procedures to:
                       a. Designate the levels of
                       control through which each
                       identified software

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 74 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 75 of 89

                       identified software
                       configuration item is required
                       to pass.
                       b. Identify the persons or
                       groups with authority to
                       authorize changes.
                       c. Identify the persons or
                       groups to make changes at
                       each level.
 5.1.6       083       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X X                   CIO       X
                       prepare and maintain records
                       of the configuration status of
                       software configuration items.
 5.1.7       084       The project manager shall       Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       perform software configuration
                       audits to determine the correct
                       version of the software
                       configuration items and verify
                       that they conform to the
                       records that define them.
 5.1.8       085       The project manager shall        Center                   X X X X                   CIO       X
                       establish and implement
                       procedures for the storage,
                       handling, delivery, release, and
                       maintenance of deliverable
                       software products.
 5.1.9       045       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       participate in any joint
                       NASA/developer audits.
 5.2                   Software Risk Management
 5.2         086       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       record, analyze, plan, track,
                       control, and communicate all
                       of the software risks and
                       mitigation plans.
 5.3                   Software Peer Reviews/Inspections
 5.3.2       087       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       perform and report the results
                       of software peer reviews or
                       software inspections for:
                       a. Software requirements.
                       b. Software plans, including

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 75 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 76 of 89


                       cybersecurity.
                       c. Any design items that the
                       project identified for software
                       peer review or software
                       inspections according to the
                       software development plans.
                       d. Software code as defined in
                       the software and or project
                       plans.
                       e. Software test procedures.
 5.3.3       088       The project manager shall, for             Center         X X X
                       each planned software peer
                       review or software inspection:
                       a. Use a checklist or formal
                       reading technique (e.g.,
                       perspective based reading) to
                       evaluate the work products.
                       b. Use established readiness
                       and completion criteria.
                       c. Track actions identified in
                       the reviews until they are
                       resolved.
                       d. Identify the required
                       participants.
 5.3.4       089       The project manager shall, for             Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       each planned software peer
                       review or software inspection,
                       record necessary
                       measurements.
 5.4                   Software Measurements
 5.4.2       090       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       establish, record, maintain,
                       report, and utilize software
                       management and technical
                       measurements.
 5.4.3       093       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       analyze software measurement
                       data collected using
                       documented project-specified
                       and Center/organizational
                       analysis procedures.



                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 76 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                         Page 77 of 89



 5.4.4       094       The project manager shall      Center                     X X X
                       provide access to the software
                       measurement data,
                       measurement analyses, and
                       software development status as
                       requested to the sponsoring
                       Mission Directorate, the
                       NASA Chief Engineer, the
                       Center TAs, HQ SMA, and
                       other organizations as
                       appropriate.
 5.4.5       199       The project manager shall      Center                     X X X
                       monitor measures to ensure the
                       software will meet or exceed
                       performance and functionality
                       requirements, including
                       satisfying constraints.
 5.4.6       200       The project manager shall                  Center         X X
                       collect, track, and report
                       software requirements
                       volatility metrics.
 5.5                   Software Non-conformance or Defect Management
 5.5.1       201       The project manager shall track Center                    X X X X                   CIO       X
                       and maintain software
                       non-conformances (including
                       defects in tools and appropriate
                       ground software).
 5.5.2       202       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X                     CIO       X
                       define and implement clear
                       software severity levels for all
                       software non-conformances
                       (including tools, COTS,
                       GOTS, MOTS, OSS, reused
                       software components, and
                       applicable ground systems).
 5.5.3       203       The project manager shall                  Center         X X X
                       implement mandatory
                       assessments of reported
                       non-conformances for all
                       COTS, GOTS, MOTS, OSS,
                       and/or reused software
                       components.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check         Page 77 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC                                                                                   Page 78 of 89

                       components.
 5.5.4       204       The project manager shall      Center                     X X
                       implement process assessments
                       for all high severity software
                       non-conformances (closed loop
                       process).




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixC incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 78 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 79 of 89




Appendix D. Software Classifications
D.1 The applicability of requirements in this directive to specific systems and subsystems containing
software is determined through the use of the NASA-wide software classification structure. These
definitions are based on: (1) usage of the software with or within a NASA system, (2) criticality of
the system to NASA’s major programs and projects, (3) extent to which humans depend upon the
system, (4) developmental and operational complexity, and (5) extent of the Agency’s investment.
Classes A through E cover engineering-related software. Class F cover Business and Information
Technology Infrastructure Software. Using the Requirements Mapping Matrix, the number of
applicable requirements and their associated rigor are scaled back for lower software classes.
Situations in which a project contains separate systems and subsystems having different software
classes are not uncommon.
D.2 For a given system or subsystem, software is expected to be uniquely defined within a single
class. If more than one software class appears to apply, then assign the higher of the classes to the
system/subsystem. Any potential discrepancies in classifying software within Classes A through-- E
are to be resolved using the definitions and the five underlying factors listed in the previous
paragraph. Engineering and SMA provide dual TA chains for resolving classification issues. The
NASA Chief Engineer is the ultimate TA for software classification disputes concerning definitions
in this NPR.

Class A: Human Rated Space Software Systems
a. Definition:
1. Human Space Flight Software Systems*: Ground and flight software systems developed or
operated by or for NASA needed to perform a primary mission objective of human space flight and
directly interact with human space flight systems. Limited to software required to perform “vehicle,
crew, or primary mission function,” as defined by software that is:
(a) Required to operate the vehicle or space asset (e.g., spacesuit, rover, or outpost), including
commanding of the vehicle or asset.
(b) Required to sustain a safe, habitable1 environment for the crew.
(c) Required to achieve the primary mission objectives.
(d) Required to directly prepare resources (e.g., data, fuel, power) that are consumed by the above
functions.
*Includes software involving launch, on-orbit, in space, surface operations, entry, descent, and
landing.
1 Current standards that address habitability and environmental health, including atmospheric
composition and pressure, air, and water quality and monitoring, acceleration, acoustics, vibration,
radiation, thermal environment, combined environmental effects, and human factors, are
documented in NASA-Standard-3001 Volume 1, Space Flight Human-System Standard: Crew
Health, NASA-Standard-3001 Volume 2, Space Flight Human-System Standard: Human Factors,
Habitability, and Environmental Health, FAA HFDS - Human Factors Design Standard.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 79 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 80 of 89


b. Examples:
Examples of Class A software (human-rated space flight) include, but are not limited to, the mission
phases listed below.
1. During Launch:
Abort modes and selection; separation control; range safety; crew interface (display and controls);
crew escape; critical systems monitoring and control; guidance, navigation, and control; and
communication and tracking.
2. On-Orbit/In Space:
Extravehicular activity (EVA); control of electrical power; payload control (including suppression of
hazardous satellite and device commands); critical systems monitoring and control; guidance,
navigation, and control; life support systems; crew escape; rendezvous and docking; failure
detection, isolation and recovery; communication and tracking; and mission operations.
3. On Ground:
Pre-launch and launch operations; Mission Control Center (and Launch Control Center) front-end
processors; spacecraft commanding; vehicle processing operations; re-entry operations; flight
dynamics simulators used for ascent abort calls; and launch and flight controller stations for
human-crewed spaceflight.
4. Entry, Descent, and Landing (EDL):
Command and control; aero-surface control; power; thermal; fault protection; and communication
and tracking.
5. Surface Operations:
Planet/lunar surface EVA and communication and tracking.
c. Exclusions:
Class A does not include:
1. Software that happens to fly in space but is superfluous to mission objectives (e.g., software
contained in an iPod carried on board by an astronaut for personal use); or
2. Software that exclusively supports aeronautics, research and technology, and science conducted
without space flight applications; or
3. Systems (e.g., simulators, emulators, facilities) used to test Class A systems containing software
in a development environment.

Class B: Non-Human Space Rated Software Systems or Large Scale Aeronautics Vehicles
a. Definitions:
1. Space Systems involve flight and ground software that should perform reliably to accomplish
primary mission objectives or major function(s) in non-human space rated systems. Included is
software involving launch, on orbit, in space, surface operations, entry, descent, and landing. These
systems are limited to software that is:
                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 80 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 81 of 89


systems are limited to software that is:
(a) Required to operate the vehicle or space asset (e.g., orbiter, lander, probe, flyby spacecraft,
rover, launch vehicle, or primary instrument) such as commanding of the vehicle or asset;
(b) Required to achieve the primary mission objectives; or
(c) Required to directly prepare resources (data, fuel, power) that are consumed by the above
functions.
2. Aeronautic Vehicles include large scale2 aeronautic software systems unique to NASA in which
the software:
(a) Is integral to the control of an airborne vehicle;
(b) Monitors and controls the cabin environment; or
(c) Monitors and controls the vehicle’s emergency systems.
This definition includes software for vehicles classified as “test,” “experimental,” or
“demonstration” that meets the above definition for Class B software. Also included are systems in a
test or demonstration where the software’s known and scheduled intended use is to be part of a Class
A or B software system.
2 Large-scale (life cycle cost exceeding $250M) fully integrated technology development system –
see NPR 7120.8.
b. Examples:
Examples of Class B software include, but are not limited to:
1. Space, Launch, Ground, EDL, and Surface Systems:
Propulsion systems; power systems; guidance navigation and control; fault protection; thermal
systems; command and control ground systems; planetary/lunar surface operations; hazard
prevention; primary instruments; science sequencing engine; simulations that create operational
EDL parameters; subsystems that could cause the loss of science return from multiple instruments;
flight dynamics and related data; and launch and flight controller stations for non-human spaceflight.
2. Aeronautics Vehicles (Large Scale NASA Unique):
Guidance, navigation, and control; flight management systems; autopilot; propulsion systems; power
systems; emergency systems (e.g., fire suppression systems, emergency egress systems, emergency
oxygen supply systems, traffic/ground collision avoidance system); and cabin pressure and
temperature control.
c. Exclusions:
Class B does not include:
1. Software that exclusively supports non-primary instruments on non-human space rated systems
(e.g., low-cost, non-primary, university supplied instruments); or
2. Systems (e.g., simulators, emulators, facilities) used in testing Class B systems containing
software in a development environment; or

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 81 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 82 of 89


3. Software for NASA Class D payloads, as defined in NPR 8705.4.

Class C: Mission Support Software or Aeronautic Vehicles, or Major Engineering/Research
Facility Software
a. Definitions:
1. Space Systems include the following types of software:
(a) Flight or ground software necessary for the science return from a single (non-primary)
instrument;
(b) Flight or ground software used to analyze or process mission data;
(c) Other software for which a defect could adversely impact the attainment of some secondary
mission objectives or cause operational problems;
(d) Software used for the testing of space assets;
(e) Software used to verify system requirements of space assets by analysis; or
(f) Software for space flight operations not covered by Class A or B software.
2. Aeronautic Vehicles include systems for non-large scale aeronautic software systems in which the
software:
(a) Is integral to the control of an airborne vehicle;
(b) Monitors and controls the cabin environment; or
(c) Monitors and controls the vehicle’s emergency system.
Also included are systems on an airborne vehicle (including large-scale vehicles) that acquire, store,
or transmit the official record copy of flight or test data.
3. Major Engineering/Research Facility is systems that operate a major facility for research,
development, test, or evaluation (e.g., facility controls and monitoring, systems that operate
facility-owned instruments, apparatus, and data acquisition equipment).
4. Sounding Rockets and Sounding Rocket payloads.
5. Software for NASA Class D payloads, as defined in NPR 8705.4.
b. Examples:
Examples of Class C software include, but are not limited to:
1. Space Systems:
Software that supports prelaunch integration and test; mission data processing and analysis; analysis
software used in trend analysis and calibration of flight engineering parameters; primary/major
science data collection storage and distribution systems (e.g., Distributed Active Archive Centers);
simulators, emulators, or facilities used to test Class A, B, or C software in development; integration
and test environments; software used to verify system-level requirements associated with Class A, B,
or C software by analysis (e.g., guidance, navigation, and control system performance verification by

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 82 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 83 of 89


analysis); simulators used for mission training; software employed by network operations and
control (which is redundant with systems used at tracking complexes); command and control of
non-primary instruments; ground mission support software used for secondary mission objectives,
real-time analysis, and planning (e.g., monitoring, consumables analysis, mission planning);
CubeSat mission software; SmallSat mission software; sounding rocket software and sounding
rocket experiments or payload software; and all software on NASA Class D payloads, as defined in
NPR 8705.4 to examples of Class C software.
2. Aeronautics Vehicles:
Guidance, navigation, and control; flight management systems; autopilot; propulsion systems; power
systems; emergency systems (e.g., fire suppression systems, emergency egress systems, emergency
oxygen supply systems, traffic/ground collision avoidance system); cabin pressure and temperature
control; in-flight telescope control software; aviation data integration systems; automated flight
planning systems and primary/major science data collection storage and distribution systems (e.g.,
Distributed Active Archive Centers); sounding rockets and sounding rocket experiments or payload
software; flight software for free-flying unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in public airspace or over
controlled ranges; Balloon Flight software and balloon flight experiment software, and all software
on NASA Class D pay loads, as defined in NPR 8705.4.
3. Major Engineering/Research Facility:
Major Center facilities; data acquisition and control systems for wind tunnels, vacuum chambers,
and rocket engine test stands; ground-based software used to operate a major facility telescope; and
major aeronautic applications facilities (e.g., air traffic management systems; high fidelity motion
based simulators).
c. Exclusions:
Class C does not include:
Systems unique to research, development, test, or evaluation activities in a major
engineering/research facility or airborne vehicle in which the system is not part of the facility or
vehicle and does not impact the operation of the facility or vehicle.

Class D: Basic Science/Engineering Design and Research and Technology Software
a. Definitions:
1. Basic Science/Engineering Design includes:
(a) Ground software that performs secondary science data analysis;
(b) Ground software tools that support engineering development;
(c) Ground software or software tools used for informal testing of software systems;
(d) Ground software tools that support mission planning or formulation;
(e) Ground software that operates a research, development, test, or evaluation laboratory (i.e., not a
major engineering/research facility); or
(f) Ground software that provides decision support for non-mission critical situations.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 83 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 84 of 89


2. Airborne Vehicle Systems include:
(a) Software whose anomalous behavior would cause or contribute to a failure of system function
resulting in a minor failure condition for the airborne vehicle (e.g., DO-178C, Software
Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification, “Class D”);
(b) Software whose anomalous behavior would cause or contribute to a failure of system function
with no effect on airborne vehicle operational capability or pilot workload (e.g., DO-178C, “Class
E”); or
(c) Ground software tools that perform research associated with airborne vehicles or systems.
3. Major Engineering/Research Facility related software includes research software that executes in
a major engineering/research facility but is independent of the operation of the facility.
b. Examples:
Examples of Class D software include, but are not limited to:
1. Basic Science and Engineering Design:
Engineering design and modeling tools (e.g., computer-aided design and computer-aided
manufacturing (CAD/CAM), thermal/structural analysis tools); project assurance databases (e.g.,
problem reporting, analysis, and corrective action system, requirements management databases);
propulsion integrated design tools; integrated build management systems; inventory management
tools; probabilistic engineering analysis tools; test stand data analysis tools; test stand engineering
support tools; experimental flight displays evaluated in a flight simulator; forecasts and assimilated
data products; and tools used to develop design reference missions to support early mission
planning.
2. Airborne Vehicles:
Software tools for designing advanced human-automation systems; experimental synthetic-vision
display; and cloud-aerosol light detection and ranging installed on an aeronautics vehicle; flight
software for physically constrained UAVs such as UAVs on tethers, within cages, or used in indoor
labs; and experimental UAV payloads with minor consequences of failure.
c. Exclusions:
Class D does not include:
1. Software that can impact primary or secondary mission objectives or cause loss of data that is
generated by space systems;
2. Software that operates a major engineering/research facility;
3. Software that operates an airborne vehicle; or
4. Flight software (i.e., software that meets the flight portions of Class A, B, or C Software
Classifications).

Class E: Design Concept, Research, Technology, and General Purpose Software
a. Definitions:

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 84 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 85 of 89



1. Software developed to explore a design concept or hypothesis but not used to make decisions for
an operational Class A, B, or C system or a to-be-built Class A, B, or C system.
2. Software used to perform minor analyses of science or experimental data.
3. A defect in Class E software may affect the productivity of a single user or small group of users
but generally will not affect mission objectives or system safety. Class E software cannot be
safety-critical software. If the software is classified as safety-critical software, then it has to be
classified as Class D or higher.
4. Class E software runs in a general-purpose computing environment or a board top environment.
Class E software does not support ground tests, flight tests, or operations.
b. Examples:
Examples of Class E software include, but are not limited to, parametric models to estimate
performance or other attributes of design concepts; software to explore correlations between data
sets; line of code counters; file format converters; and document template builders. Class E can
include prototypes of flight and ground systems, developed at minimal cost, in the spirit of
“exploring a design concept.” Once the design concept is demonstrated, and a program agrees to
incorporate it for flight or ground operational use, or for an in-flight test of the technology, then the
software should be upgraded to its appropriate classification, based on the operational (or in-flight
test) use case. Class E software includes, but is not limited to, software such as word processing
applications, spreadsheet applications, and presentation applications.
c. Exclusions:
Class E does not include:
1. Flight systems (i.e., software that meets the flight portions of Class A, B, C, or D Software
Classifications);
2. Software developed by or for NASA to directly support an operational system (e.g., human-rated
space system, robotics spacecraft, space instrument, airborne vehicle, major engineering/research
facility, mission support facility, and primary/major science data collection storage and distribution
systems);
3. Software developed by or for NASA to be flight qualified to support an operational system;
4. Software that directly affects primary or secondary mission objectives;
5. Software that can adversely affect the integrity of engineering/scientific artifacts;
6. Software used in technical decisions concerning operational systems, or systems being developed
for operation;
7. Software that has an impact on operational vehicles; or
8. Software that is safety-critical.
Business and Information Technology Infrastructure Software

Class F: General Purpose Computing, Business, and IT Software

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 85 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD                                                                                   Page 86 of 89



a. Definition:
General purpose computing Business and IT software used in support of the Agency, multiple
Centers, multiple programs/projects, single Centers/projects, or locally deployed General Purpose
Infrastructure To-Be Component of the NASA Enterprise Architecture. These software applications
are generally used to support voice, wide-area network, local area network, video, data centers,
cloud computing, information management, business and IT application services (e.g., Finance,
Logistics, Human Capital, Procurement), messaging and collaboration, and public Web. A defect in
Class F software is likely to affect the productivity of multiple users across a single geographic
location or several geographic locations and may affect mission objectives or system safety. Mission
objectives can be cost, schedule, or technical objectives for any work that the Agency or a Center
performs.
b. Examples:
Examples of Class F software include, but are not limited to, Agency-wide enterprise applications
(e.g., WebTADS, SAP, CONCURGov, ePayroll, Business Warehouse), Center-specific software, or
specific Web applications, including mobile applications; Agency-wide educational outreach
software; software in support of the NASA-wide area network; and the NASA Web portal.




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixD incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 86 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixE                                                                                   Page 87 of 89




Appendix E. References
a. CMMI® Development V2.0 model, see https://cmmiinstitute.com/.
b. CMU/SEI-2010-TR-033 CMMI® for Development, Version 1.3 Software Engineering Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University, 2010. See https://cmmiinstitute.com/.
c. DO-178C, Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification.
d. FAR 52.212-4, Contract Terms and Conditions - Commercial Items.
e. FAR 2005-014, Federal Acquisition Regulation; Smart BUY Pages 61603 – 61605.
f. Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq.
g. Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA).
h. Government-Wide, US Government Accountability Office, GAO-14-413.
i. IEEE 828-2012, IEEE Standard for Configuration Management in Systems and Software
Engineering.
j. IEEE 1012, IEEE Standard for Software Verification and Validation, https://standards.nasa.gov/.
k. IEEE 1028, IEEE Standard for Software Reviews and Audits, https://standards.nasa.gov/.
l. ISO 5806, Information processing -- Specification of single-hit decision tables.
m. ISO/IEC 2382-20, Information technology–Vocabulary–Part 20: System development, 20.05.05.
n. ISO/IEC 19770-1:2017, Information technology – IT asset management – Part 1: IT asset
management systems—Requirements.
o. ISO/IEC 19770-5:2015, Information technology.
p. ISO/IEC 26514:2008, Systems and software engineering–requirements for designers and
developers of user documentation.
q. ISO/IEC/IEEE 15026-1:2019, Systems and software engineering—Systems and software
assurance—Part 1: Concepts and vocabulary.
r. ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765, Systems and software engineering – Vocabulary.
s. ISO/IEC/IEEE 26513:2017, Systems and software engineering–requirements for testers and
reviewers of information for users.
t. ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119-4:2015, Software and systems engineering -- Software testing -- Part 4: Test
techniques.
u. ISO/IEC 15939, Systems and Software Engineering—Measurement Process.
v. ISO/IEC 19770, International Standards for Software Asset Management Processes.
w. ISO/IEC 24765, Systems and Software Engineering – Vocabulary.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixE incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 87 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixE                                                                                   Page 88 of 89


x. NASA-STD-3001, Volumes I-II, Space Flight Human System Standard.
y. NASA-STD-7009, Standard for Models and Simulations, https://standards.nasa.gov/.
z. NASA-STD-8739.9, Software Formal Inspection Standard, https://standards.nasa.gov/.
aa. NASA FAR Supplement 1852.227-86, Commercial Computer Software License in software
agreements.
bb. NASA Guidelines for Use of IT Contracts for Supporting End User Services (Update to
MFR#137 and MFR#7).
cc. NASA IV&V Management System, https://www.nasa.gov/centers/ivv/ims/home/index.html.
dd. NASA Software Engineering Website, https://nen.nasa.gov/web/software.
ee. NASA Software Process Across NASA (SPAN) Website,
https://nen.nasa.gov/web/software/wiki.
ff. NASA/SP-2010-3403, NASA Scheduling Management Handbook.
gg. NASA-HDBK-4008, Programmable Logic Devices (PLD) Handbook,
https://standards.nasa.gov/.
hh. NASA-HDBK-7009, NASA Handbook for Models and Simulations: An Implementation Guide
for NASA-STD-7009, https://standards.nasa.gov/.
ii. NFS 1813.301-79, Supporting Federal Policies, Regulations, and NASA Procedural
Requirements.
jj. NFS 1852.237-72, Access to Sensitive Information.
kk. NFS 1852.237-73 Release of Sensitive Information.
ll. NIST 800-146, Cloud Computing Synopsis and Recommendations.
mm. NIST 800-37, Risk Management Framework.
nn. NIST 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations.

oo. NPD 1200.1, NASA Internal Control.
pp. NPD 2540.1, Personal Use of Government Office Equipment Including Information Technology,
https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
qq. NPD 2810.1, NASA Information Security Policy.
rr. NPR 2190.1, NASA Export Control Program, https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
ss. NPR 2210.1, Release of NASA Software, https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
tt. NPR 2830.1, NASA Enterprise Architecture Procedures, https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
uu. NPR 2841.1, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
vv. NPR 7120.7, NASA Information Technology Program and Project Management Requirements.

                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixE incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 88 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixE                                                                                   Page 89 of 89



ww. NPR 7120.10, Technical Standards for NASA Programs and Projects,
https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
xx. NPR 7120.11, Health and Medical Technical Authority Implementation.
yy. NPR 7123.1, NASA Systems Engineering Processes and Requirements.
zz. NPR 8000.4, Agency Risk Management Procedural Requirements.
aaa. NPR 8735.2, Management of Government Quality Assurance Functions for NASA Contracts.
bbb. NPR 9250.1, Capital Asset Identification and Treatment, https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/.
ccc. NTRS ID 20160005787, “Quality Attributes for Mission Flight Software: A Reference for
Architects.”
ddd. OMB Memo M-04-08, “Maximizing Use of SmartBuy and Avoiding Duplication Agency
Activities with the President’s 24 E-Gov Initiatives.”
eee. OMB Memo M-04-16, “Software Acquisition.”
fff. OMB Memo M-15-14, “Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology.”
ggg. OMB Memo M-16-12, “Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the Acquisition and
Management of Common Information Technology: Software Licensing.”




                            This document does not bind the public, except as authorized by law or as
NPR 7150.2D -- AppendixE incorporated into a contract. This document is uncontrolled when printed. Check   Page 89 of 89
                         the NASA Online Directives Information System (NODIS) Library to verify that
                                this is the correct version before use: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov.
